To the readers:
“This book is a roadmap to convert the love-hate relationship with
the stock market into an unshakeable love bond.”
Contents
Acknowledgements
Preface
My Inspiration to Write this Book!
Disclaimer
The Best Accident that Happened in my Life: Investing
Chapter 1: The Stock Market is the Gateway to Dreaming Big!
Chapter 2: Do You Wish to Have Complete Financial Independence?
Chapter 3: The Basics of Stock Market Investment
Chapter 4: The Stock Market Is a Risky Ride – Myth or Reality?
Chapter 5: Factors Influencing the Stock Market
Chapter 6: Do the Currency Fluctuations Affect the Economy of a Country?
Chapter 7: Stock Investment versus Other Financial Investments
Chapter 8: The Psychology behind Stock Investment
Chapter 9: Understanding Stock Investment Strategically
Chapter 10: Value Investing – The Investment Strategy to Get Better ROI
Chapter 11: Stock Investment Strategy
Chapter 12: The Two Approaches to Investing
Chapter 13: How to Analyze Stocks in Order to Filter the Good Ones?
Chapter 14: Michael Porter’s Five Forces Framework for Industrial Analysis
Chapter 15: What’s the Business Capable of?
Chapter 16: Management Analysis
Chapter 17: A Closer Look at the Balance Sheet
Chapter 18: Analysing Financial Statements
Chapter 19: Valuation Analysis
Chapter 20: Behavioural Biases – The Illusion Creators
Chapter 21: Stock Investment Manifesto of Legendary Stock Investors
Chapter 22: Learning to Invest in Stocks
Chapter 23 Who Is My Well-Wisher in the Stock Market??
Chapter 24: The Fallacian Trap – A Self-Proposed Theory
Chapter 25: How Many Stocks Must You Own?
Chapter 26: Bagging the Multi-Bagger Stocks!
Chapter 27: A Bird’s Eye View to Investing
Chapter 28: An Essential Checklist for Stock Investments
Conclusion
Acknowledgement
“Gratitude turns what we have into enough.”
This anonymous quote makes much sense to me personally, especially after
completion of this book. I’ve tried including all investing fundamentals,
theories, principles, and technical knowledge that I acquired through years of
learning and implementation. The book wouldn’t have been possible without
the blessings of my parents and mentors and the contributions of numerous
people who worked selflessly to make this happen.
The book has attained its final shape after rigorous editing and proofreading by
Ratan Deep Singh and Chandni Agrawal. The enlightening technical inputs
have been provided by Panjul Agrawal and Urvi Kotak. It would’ve been a
slightly boring read without the creative images designed by Dev Vishwakarma
and Mohit Malviya. Thank you, Priya Jain, for providing innovative inputs
along with moral support for this book. Finally, I’d like to extend sincere
gratitude towards Nitishiree Gupta for her contribution in preparing the draft of
this book.
Last but not the least, a special thanks goes to Notion Press Publishing for
publishing this book and believing in its success.
Preface
‘Innocent lay investors have all the rights to earn big from the stock market.’
This book aims to provide them with the required fundamental knowledge. But,
that’s just not it! If you’ve already got your hands dirty in equity investing, this
book might help you expand the horizon of your knowledge.
‘Investonomy’ has been written to apprise the investors about the basic rules
of stock investment. The book also reveals basic strategies and rules that an
investor must keep in mind while picking up stocks. A thorough reading of this
book will ensure that the reader is fully educated about how to invest in stocks
successfully.
The book also busts popular myths like:
● To be a successful stock investor, you need to be a statistician,
mathematician, or a financial guru.
● The stock market is like gambling in a casino.
● Stock analysis is challenging to learn, and seeking professional help is a
must.
Why is ‘Investonomy’ relevant for you?
I’m just guessing that you wish to get rich sometime in life. I mean, who
doesn’t own the desire to have riches big enough? If that’s not you, please
develop an urge to earn big and then continue reading!
Now, when you search for available options to quench your thirst of ‘Big,
Rewarding Returns’, you end up gambling money in stocks (like many people
around). While your money is on the line, you’re illogically hopeful that you
would get a positive return. But unfortunately, the market doesn’t move
accordingly and you lose your hard-earned money. This leaves you heart-
broken and you lose trust in stock market investing!
But, just one anecdote shared by a friend about how he made significant profits
from stocks, rekindles the lost desire of investing in stocks. So, with some
rejuvenated hope you make a few more attempts and are again left dreading
when you start losing. How do you feel at this point? Betrayed! Frustrated!
Lost!
Knowing well the pain areas of stock investment, the thought of penning down
a book crossed my mind to help every potential investor who rightly thinks that
stock investments can help him/her get rich. My sole purpose in writing this
book is to empower individual investors, who have never tried investing in
stocks or have been unsuccessful in their attempts.
Investonomy aims to tell you the means as to how you can make substantial
money from the stock market with the right intent of investment. The book is a
road map for fuelling your ambitions and chasing the passion running through
your veins.
Pranjal Kamra
CEO, Finology Ventures Pvt. Ltd.
(A SEBI registered Investment Advisory firm)
My Inspiration to Write this Book!
There are many incidents that broke my heart on learning how innocent
investors are fooled in the stock market to lose all their hard-earned savings.
Not wasting much of your time, I would like to mention here two very heart-
breaking incidents:
1. One of the victims of stock fraudulence is a young professional from
Bangalore, who was fooled by a stock broking company, Deceptive Brokers
Pvt. Ltd. (name changed on purpose). The company claimed to be a reputed
stock broking company and shared a plan which required an investment value of
Rs. 40,000. As per the stock brokerage firm, the investments double up in value
in just a few months.
Finding the deal lucrative, the victim agreed to invest in it. But soon, the
company pulled the innocent victim into a bigger trap by encouraging him to
invest further, by stating that the market is up-and-coming, and hence, can fetch
him more significant returns. The poor young investor was genuinely unaware
of the fraudulent activities that openly happen in this industry. At last, he ended
up investing up to Rs. 4 lakhs, only in the hope to bring up his investment value.
2. Another sob story was of a retired senior civilian who was approached by a
stock brokerage firm. The firm promised him that by making small investments
into stocks, he would be able to grow his pension money. The victim thought
that by having an increased income, he would get a great deal of comfort to
survive in his old age, so he invested in one of the schemes.
As per the policy, the company would invest 20% of his pension money every
month to turn it into promising returns. When after two months, the investor
asked the firm to confirm the proofs of the investments done to date, the firm
came up with explanations of all sorts. The poor victim insisted on returning his
money, but all his efforts went in vain.
Both these incidents created a spark in me to share my first-hand knowledge of
stock investment for the sake of retail investors, who fall prey to lucrative deals
offered by the so-called stock advisory firms. In this quest to help innocent
people around, I ended up writing this book.
I want to extend my heartfelt thanks to you for giving your valuable time to this
book. I dedicate this book to my family, who inspired me and supported me in
my journey of discovering my passion in stock market investment.
Pranjal Kamra
Disclaimer
The content, including the formulae, concepts, examples, charts or graphs
mentioned in this book, has been taken from reliable resources. We have tried to
express ourselves in this book as precisely and accurately as we can, and any
errors, if found, are entirely accidental and not intentional. This book contains
an honest, unbiased approach to stock investment and has been written with the
sole purpose of benefiting you.
One sincere advice to our readers is to research thoroughly before investing, as
money cannot grow on trees. And, we, as writers, must not be held responsible
for any losses incurred by investing in stocks using the information shared here.
The Best Accident that Happened in my
Life: Investing
I’m sharing this story with you just to make you think that when an
inexperienced guy like me with no background in share investment can make it
big, then, why can’t you?
A few years ago, my father gifted me a TVS WEGO on my birthday. But, better
than that, he also gave me Rs. 20,000 to invest in shares. Being a novice, I took
an emotional decision and purchased the stock of TVS MOTORS from it.
Bingo! I was lucky to have made good money out of this transaction, and it
gave me a kick! I then started investing more in stocks and my investing
journey began.
After tasting success in the first shot, I became overconfident that I have
mastered the art of investing. However, my luck did not favour me in my next
two purchases. I bought stocks worth Rs. 200 and Rs. 30 each. The current
value of these stocks today is Rs. 0 and Rs. 3 respectively. As I look back, I
realize that my success with TVS Motors was nothing but mere beginner's luck.
By the way, do you know that one who claims to have never lost money in
stock trading is either lying or has never invested? Only if you lose, will you
learn…
Back in 2015, I was a struggling law student, and my father believed that the
law course alone would not be enough for a promising career. So, he enrolled
me in the Company Secretary course. One day along with dozens of emails that
the CS institute used to send me, I got an email informing me about a certain
institute called NISM.
When I first heard about the National Institute of Securities Market (NISM), I
was extremely thrilled to know that such an institute exists which is solely
dedicated to the Securities Market. So I went ahead to pursue a one-year
certificate course from NISM on stock investment.
After struggling for half a decade in figuring out my calling, I finally felt that I
belonged to this place. I loved reading about value investing and fundamental
analysis to such an extent that I would immerse myself reading day in and day
out.
My constant perseverance to discover more about the stock market made me a
continuous learner. Soon, I started a YouTube channel on the stock market and
mutual fund investment. After a year of starting the channel (goes by the name
Pranjal Kamra), I incorporated my company, ‘Finology Ventures Pvt. Ltd.,’
which is the first SEBI registered investment advisory company in Chhattisgarh.
Chapter 1: The Stock Market is the
Gateway to Dreaming Big!
Often you must have heard a friend saying, “I wish I had enough money to open
up a garment business,” or “I wish I had money to start my restaurant.” On
hearing such ambitions, I often applaud my friends saying, “Great, Go ahead,
chase your dreams.” But there is something that stops them from chasing their
dreams.
So what is that ‘something’ that stops them from dreaming big?
1. It could be lack of knowledge, experience, and skills.
2. It could be a lack of funds or sourcing.
3. It could be a lack of time and support.
Or, it could be all three of these put together, which is stopping them from
chasing their dreams. But, do we need these three factors to build up a business,
or is there a way around? Think hard!
What if I tell you that you can become the owners of business without knowing
how to run it? What if I tell you that you can still own businesses without funds
or sourcing? What if I tell you that you can own businesses without giving your
time and support? Sounds unrealistic! Doesn’t it?
It is a fact which is only possible in the opportunistic world of stock
investment.
What Can You Expect from the Stock Market?
Stock market comes with huge opportunities to grow your wealth. Here is what
it has to offer you:
● Investing in the stock market is a great way to own good businesses,
as your money is in the hands of fully dedicated business managers.
You invest your money in promising ventures, run and managed by
highly competent pro-active thinkers like Warren Buffet, Ratan Tata,
Adi Godrej, etc. These people are working each day to create
synergies with a large team of professionals, only to make their
businesses succeed. When their businesses grow, your money
grows. So do you think that you would ever find a better deal to grow
your money? Where Legends like Mr. Ratan Tata and Mr. Adi
Godrej are working for you?
● You may invest a small amount of money in businesses, which
multiplies enormously over time due to increased business value.
You have the freedom to invest money as low as 500 rupees.
● You just invest your money and forget about it. It is the best way to
let your money grow in the stock market, as businesses take time to
grow.
So can we be assured that stock investment paints such an ideal picture? Not
really! It requires a great deal of patience as an investor.
Just think, does a newly established business earn you profit right from the first
day? No, right? We patiently wait for our businesses to grow; we work 12 hours
a day for years together to earn profit from our businesses. Stock investment is
just the same; you need to pick the right stocks and give them time to grow. The
value of stocks increases in the long run when the business grows, and it takes
time to achieve that.
So, before beginning this enticing journey of stock investment, let’s try to
answer the following questions to test your current understanding of the stock
market:
Don’t worry if you don’t know some or all of these answers. Just take some
wild guesses instead.
Please answer the following questions quickly and instinctively:
1. Can you get assured returns from stocks?
a. Yes
b. No
2. Do you need to analyze financial and technical charts to be a successful
stock investor?
a. Yes
b. No
3. Which of the following can bring you the highest returns?
a. Land
b. Gold
c. Stocks
d. Debentures
e. Fixed deposits
4. Can you easily learn and practice stock investment?
a. Yes
b. No
5. Can you become richer than you ever dreamt of, by investing in stocks?
a. Yes, possibly
b. No, never
6. Should you be still investing in stocks if you are rich enough?
a. Yes
b. No
7. How much is India’s financial literacy rate?
a. 24%
b. 65%
c. 83%
d. 92%
8. Out of 132 Crore people in India, how many invest in the stock market?
a. Only 10%
b. Only 20%
c. About 40%
d. Only 2%
9. Despite India being one of the most populous countries, why do most
Indians not invest in stocks?
a. They are unaware of investing rules
b. They are scared of losing money
c. They quit because they have lost money
d. All of the above
The answers to the above questions are:
1. No 2. No 3. C 4.Yes 5. Yes, possibly 6. Yes 7. A 8. D 9. D
Don’t worry if you have got some answers wrong. The following chapters will
be eye-openers in discovering this wonderful mesmerizing world of stocks. So
hold tight as we begin to dig deeper into stock investment. I wish you a happy
and fulfilling reading.
Chapter 2: Do You Wish to Have Complete
Financial Independence?
Caught up in a rat race of working tirelessly to make our ends meet, we often
wonder whether we can ever have it all without being trapped in such menace.
Or, say, do you often dream of becoming financially independent by the time
you turn 40? Or, do you wish to own riches big enough that you don’t have to
control your expenses anymore? Or, do you wish to take off some moments
enjoying life while your bank balance is still rising?
If yes, then this chapter will excite you.
Introspection
Let us dig a little deeper into seeing how well you understand your financial
needs. Here is a worksheet that you need to answer quickly.
How to use the worksheet?
● Given below are some questions.
● Each question has four options to choose from, with marks allotted.
The table below will help you to understand how much money you will be able
to make five years down the line. I request you to take a pencil and quickly
mark down the answers.
1) What is your aim behind investing money?
Options Points
a. You want to accumulate wealth 4
b. You want to buy a house 3
c. You want to do your Retirement Planning
2
d. For Child Education/ Marriage 1
Your answer _____________________
2) When would you withdraw the invested money in the future?
Options Points
a. After 10 years 4
b. In 5-10 years 3
c. In 2-5 years 2
d. Within 2 years 1
3. Are you the only bread earner of the family?
Options Points
a. No 4
b. Yes, with one dependent 3
c. I have two to four dependents 2
d. I have more than four dependents
1
4. Do you have any financial obligations like loan repayment?
Options
Points
a. No 4
b. Yes, less than 10% of my earnings are utilized in EMIs 3
c. Yes, 10 – 20% of my earnings are utilized in EMIs 2
d. Yes, more than 20% of my earnings are utilized in EMIs 1
5. Which of the following investment returns are you looking at? (the
table shows the range of CAGR (Compound Annual Growth Rate)
you can achieve by choosing the respective options)
Options Best Case Worst Case Average Return Points
a. 50.00% - 28.00% 12.00% 4
b. 30.00% - 15.00% 10% 3
c. 15.00% - 5.00% 9.00% 2
d. 7.00% 00.00% 7.00% 1
6. If you are offered a promising job, what compensation structure
would you choose?
Options Points
a. Employee stock options with a current value of Rs 1,00,000 4
and prospects for further appreciation
b. An upfront bonus of Rs 1,00,000 3
c. A 10% pay increase in your salary of Rs 4,00,000 2
d. A 3-year job guarantee 1
Marking Scheme
Calculate the total marks based on the above option chosen by you.
% of Allocation
Equity
Total
Equity
Category
Mid-Cap Fixed
Marks
Large- Gold
and Multi- Deposits
Cap
Cap
21-24 Aggressive 25 60 10 5
16-20 Moderately Aggressive 30 50 10 10
11-15 Moderate 40 20 20 20
6-10 Conservative 20 0 70 10
So, now you know what kinds of risks and returns you are ready to take as an
investor. You are also aware of how much money you will make in the near
future with your current choice of financial investments. The exercise we did
also revealed the potential you have to earn if you invest in the stock market.
This awareness is the first step in creating riches bigger than you ever dreamt
of. Well done!! You have analyzed and understood what 70% of people fail to
understand about their own finances. And let me tell you that a good beginning
is half done.
Chapter 3: The Basics of Stock Market
Investment
In the words of the famous value stock investor, Peter Lynch, “Everyone
has the brainpower to follow the stock market. If you made it through fifth-
grade math, you could do it.”
What is a Share?
A company needs capital or funding to grow, expand, and function. The
popular way of generating money is to take a loan from the bank, on which you
pay fixed interest every month. Another way of generating funds is by releasing
shares of the company which are bought by the public.
A company’s capital is divided into smaller units called shares. A “Share” is a
term used to describe a part of the ownership of a company. If you own a share
of the company, you hold the ownership of the company. Thus, you are entitled
to receive the share of earnings of that company.
When an investor buys a share of the company, he becomes a part-owner of the
company. The investor is entitled to a percentage of the profit, and his liability
is only limited to the share value. The benefit is that despite being the owner of
the company, you don’t bear the losses beyond your investment value. The
other advantage is that due to the presence of a stock exchange, you can quickly
sell or buy shares of any other company at any time you want.
Infosys had started its venture in 1981. Infosys is the brain-child of N. R.
Narayana Murthy, Nandan Nilekani and others, who have been the key drivers
of the business for three decades. When Infosys was started, it wasn’t making
big money though it was doing reasonably well.
But, things changed in 1993 when Infosys went public. It released its shares but
people were too sceptical in investing in a company with no labour, no
machinery and no plant. A handful of investors who invested merely Rs. 10,000
in 1993 in Infosys stock have become multi-millionaires today.
The rest is history. Infosys quickly rose to come up at par with Tatas. Today,
Nandan Nilekani is worth more than Rs. 3,000 Crores.
This is how, by releasing shares, a company borrows money from the public.
The money is borrowed in exchange for ownership of the company. So, when
the company grows, the share prices soar, bringing profits to the shareholders.
What Defines a Stock Market?
If you’re a smart shopper, you’ll enjoy exploring and shopping in a stock
market. And, if you’re not a smart shopper, you’ll become one in the stock
market. I say so because the Stock Market facilitates stock trading, i.e., both
buying and selling of stocks. In a normal marketplace you’ll just buy, but here
you’ll sell as well, so you control both aspects and thereby your fate is in your
own hands.
Two Essential Components of the Stock Market
The two important participants in the stock market are:
1. Investors: Investors engage in a low-risk game that involves fundamental
analysis of a company before investing.
2. Speculators: Speculators are people who are involved in a high-risk
betting on the expected price movement of listed securities.
The basic differences between Investing and Speculating
S. Basis of Investing Speculating
No differentiation
1. The aim of The aim of investing is The aim of speculating
investment to invest money safely is to bet money on
by applying the stocks to gain good
fundamental analysis of profit.
stock valuation.
2. The Basis Investing is based on the Speculating is based on
of fundamental value market rumours and
investment analysis of the company. stock price changes.
3. Duration Long-term based. Short-term based.
4. The Risk It involves moderate to It involves high risk.
involved low risk.
5. Returns on The benefit comes when The profit comes when
investment the value of the business the prices of the shares
increases. move as expected.
6 Expectations The rate of return The rate of return
expected is modest and expected is high and
realistic. unrealistic, at times.
8. Source of An investor invests his A speculator borrows
money own money. money and invests in
stocks.
9. The Pattern of Returns may be Erratic source of income
earning prolonged, but the and may involve losses
source of income is as well.
stable.
10. Approach to The investor takes a The speculator is
investment well-thought decision instinctive and looks at
after analyzing the value making immediate
of the company. gains.
11. Investor’s An investor looks at the A speculator is
psychology underlying ethics, desperate to earn money
values, and and that’s the key driver
fundamentals to invest. to buy stocks.
12 Success The probability of losing The probability of losing
Probability money is much less as money is 50% as
the decision is backed by speculating is much like
in-depth analysis betting.
Though the investors bring a lot of stability in the market, yet speculators are
equally crucial for a market to have a balance.
Speculators are needed as they play these two critical roles:
● Speculators bring fluctuations in the pricing of stocks. The volatility
gives investors a fair chance to buy shares at low prices.
● Speculators trade stocks frequently, which makes the volumes of shares
available for buying and selling.
The Significance of the Stock Market
A stock exchange is an organization which hosts a market where buyer and
seller of shares come together to trade stocks (either buy or sell). In simple
words, the stock market acts as a platform where buyers and sellers meet.
Other important functions of the Stock Market are:
1. Price Discovery – The stock market enables the fair valuation of stock
pricing by providing a transparent medium. The shares are priced and
evaluated based on their demand and supply. If a company is expected to
perform well, the demand for its share rises, and hence, the price goes up.
2. Liquidity – Stock market provides you with a 24×7 opportunity to sell or
buy stocks as and when desired. This ensures easy liquidity bringing in a
great deal of convenience to you as investors.
3. The habit of saving and investment – As you can invest even a small
amount of money in the stock market, it enhances the practice of savings
amongst the people.
4. Expansion of business – Any listed company can quickly meet the need
for funds required to expand its business.
5. Provides opportunities for speculation – To ensure liquidity, stock
exchange provides an opportunity for healthy speculation to its investors.
The stock exchange is much needed for the economic growth of the country. By
trading shares, the corporate sector can build financial corpus using which it can
expand its operations or deploy the capital raised for the benefit of the company.
It should not be looked upon as a place to gamble or trade; rather, it is a place to
invest and let your money grow.
How Do You Make Money as a Shareholder?
When you hold a share of the company, there are mainly two types of incomes
you may earn. One is the dividend income, and the other is the increase in
the value of the investment. Let's understand each of these.
● Dividend income – The profits earned by a company are either
reinvested in the business or given away as a part of earnings to its
shareholders. The part of the profits of a company which is given to
shareholders is called dividends.
● Appreciation of the value of investment – One of the primary reasons
to invest money in the market is to see the value of investment getting
appreciated. The demand for the share is affected by the performance of
the company resulting in stock price fluctuations. An increase in the price
of the share appreciates the value of the investment.
So these were the hard-core basics of the stock market investment that were
written to give you a clear picture of how shares work. This knowledge will act
as a foundation to grasp the rest of the chapters.
Let me tell you that even though the stock market is so much talked about and
written about, most people are unaware of the fundamental realities of it. Those
who wish to learn about the stock market investment may get demotivated by
seeing a lot of technical graphs and charts shown on TV or in newspapers. But
the reality is that these large financial-statistical numbers have very little to do
with stock investments. The good news is that stock investment is for each one
of us irrespective of our background.
Chapter 4: The Stock Market Is a Risky
Ride – Myth or Reality?
In the words of William Feather, “The funniest thing about the stock
market is that every time one person buys, the another sells, and both think
they are astute.”
Are you scared to lose or have lost your hard-earned money in stocks? Or, do
you treat the stock market as risky? If yes, then this chapter will be an eye-
opener for you.
Too often, people think that the stock market is like gambling in a casino with a
high possibility of losing all your money in seconds. But fortunately, this is not
what the stock market investment is. You lose money in the stock market only if
you are an impatient trader or when you lack the right approach to invest. Since
you have not been taught the core logic of dealing with shares, the stock market
is still an enigma for you.
If I talk from my personal experience, investing is simple. Just think, if there
was some rocket science in it, then, how did people with no financial skills
become multi-millionaires by merely investing in stocks? Nor is it for the high
IQ number crunchers, else, the list of successful investors would contain only
mathematicians and statisticians in it, which is not the case.
Below is an example to illustrate the same:
Can you decode this graph?
Fig: Graph showing Sensex performance over one year
The best part is that this graph doesn’t need to be decoded (cid:0)
One famous real-life success story of stock market investment is Warren
Buffett, who is one of the richest men on Earth. He owes almost all his wealth
to the profits earned from stock investing. The irony is that without being a
financial guru, he outperformed the best financial gurus on this planet to create
a multi-billion worth. It surely proves that you need not be a mathematician, a
business analyst, or an accomplished statistician to make money from the
stocks.
Alas! The sanctity of stock investment is diluted by the gamblers who brought a
casino image to it. For ages, people have believed that their money is at stake by
investing in stocks. But fortunately, this is not so; the stock market is a sure-shot
money multiplier provided you play this game after being aware of its rules.
Unfortunately, stock market investment is still not dealt with in our education
system. As students, we have never been taught ‘how to invest in the stock
market.’ Even in B-schools stock investment is not taught ever, so, people are
unaware of the basics of investing in stocks.
Tip: Do you treat the stock investment as a monster or do you treat it like a
friend? Whatever your strategy is, the stock market reciprocates the same.
How Did the Stock Market Earn a Casino Image?
Before the 1990s, the stock market in India lacked a competent regulator. In
those days, there were no powerful regulatory bodies that could regulate the
stock market dealings. Moreover, there was also a lack of a centralized or
digital system to regulate stock trading. It was as good as imagining the banks
to function without having a centralized regulatory body such as RBI. Thus, the
powerful stock market participants would manipulate and dominate the stock
market to cater to their vested interests.
How Did the Stock Market Function in the Early Days?
In earlier days, the stock prices were determined based on manual bidding.
Hence due to the inefficient system, there were many unfair speculations, which
helped the insiders to earn hefty profits. On top of that, there was no technology
to verify the market news, so every true or false report led to stock price
fluctuations.
But over a period, this tarnished the image of stock investment. In the quest for
making money, the poor investors kept getting trapped and ended up losing all
their hard-earned money. Such incidences brought a negative perception of the
stock market, which still prominently exists even after decades.
As they say, ‘Once bitten, twice shy’!! So, this explains why most people are
still scared of making any investment in stocks.
Present Scenario of the Stock Market Investment
On April 12, 1992, a regulatory body called, ‘The Securities and Exchange
Board of India (SEBI)’ was formed. SEBI, the central controller of stocks in
India, was a big boon for the stock traders and investors. SEBI, as a legal body,
started working in the interest of all investors.
SEBI barred the unfair stock trading practices soon after it was formed. And it
took over to play a protective role in streamlining the investment practices.
Soon, another stock exchange called (National Stock Exchange) NSE was
formed to make the functioning of the stock exchanges transparent and
democratic.
With all these strict regulating bodies operating under a legal framework, the
stock market trading became fair and reliable once again. Though a slight
manipulation may still exist today, there is ample room to create huge wealth
through legitimate means. Thus, it would not be wrong to say that a stock
market is a safe place if the investments are done with the right intent of
investing in businesses rather than choosing to gamble for meagre profits.
It won’t be wrong to say that the stock market is like a ‘MIRROR’ – It reflects
what you are. So, watch your beliefs about money investment, as they will
reflect on your stock trading.
Chapter 5: Factors Influencing the Stock
Market
How much does the Stock Market fluctuate? So much so that whenever you
see a graph with lots of ups and downs, you presume it to be representing the
stock market.
Have you ever pondered – ‘Why do the stock prices fluctuate?’
A stock market is a place where you wake up to see a new trend every day. The
stock prices are so fluctuating that the price variation is seen not every day, not
every minute, but every second.
But, what causes the stock market to fluctuate so much? The stock market’s
volatility is caused due to various market forces influencing it, which are as
follows:
● Economic Factors: Higher economic growth or better prospects of
growth will increase the consumption in the economy. When people start to
consume more, their spending will increase. Money flow in the market
increases. This will help boost the company's Earnings and therefore share
prices or the Stock Market in a broader sense. Investors will be encouraged to
invest more in the stock market.
Conversely, when the economy is falling, it has a reverse effect on the
investors. The investors tend to withhold their spending and spend only on
essential items. They also withdraw money from the stock market.
● Geo-political factors: Unfavourable circumstances like war, terrorism,
and political unrest can negatively affect the entire business scenario.
Investors and traders refrain from investing in stocks in such
unfavourable situations.
● FIIs: The Foreign Institutional Investors refer to the foreign companies
which invest in Indian businesses. The FIIs see a great investment
opportunity in growing economies like China, India, and Brazil. They
prefer to invest a great amount of wealth in the Indian stock market with
the outstanding power of selling and buying anytime. Whenever FIIs
withdraw their investments from the Indian market, the share market gets
adversely affected.
● Inflation:
To hedge against rising inflation, people should invest more in the stock
market because no other financial instrument will be able to give high
returns as the stock market. As the purchasing power decreases, every
other commodity like buying a land, or investing in a house, becomes
more expensive.
● Foreign Exchange Rates: When the rates of foreign currencies fluctuate,
it influences our domestic stock market. It impacts the stock prices of
Indian companies which have an overseas presence. Companies that are
involved in Import and Export will have a major impact on their
operations and share prices. For instance, when Rupee depreciates,
companies (for eg IT, Pharma) that have an overseas presence, will have
a positive impact.
● Demand and Supply: If an industry grows, the demand for the shares of
promising companies in that industry increases. When the demand goes
up, the share pricing also goes up and vice-versa.
● Investor Sentiments: The stock market is invariably governed by the
feelings of the investors. If the investors are willing to take the risk, then
they tend to invest more and vice-versa.
● Interest Rate Outlook: When the RBI’s interest rate rises, businesses’
cost of borrowing increases. They are left with fewer profits, causing
share prices to fall because now, capital allotment for further expansion
and future prospects fulfillment will be less. The distribution of
dividends will also be less. When the interest rates are reduced, then the
enterprises thrive, which may result in a higher share price.
However, these impacts are short term. In a country like India, interest
rate fluctuations are prominent, because of which, companies maintain a
buffer for minimal impacts in their day to day operations.
● Trade Balance: Trade balance reflects the difference in imports and
exports of the country. If the imports are more than exports, then it is
referred to as a trade deficit. If the import remains more for a prolonged
period, then it may push the country into debt. Hence, trade deficit
negatively impacts the economy.
If the exports are more than imports, then it is referred to as a trade surplus.
Trade surplus reflects a healthy state of the economy and impacts the stock
market positively.
To sum up, these are the main factors that affect the stock market investment.
The reasons mentioned above also explain why the stock market keeps
fluctuating all the time. However, the stock market also impacts the economy of
the country.
Here Is How the Stock Market Impacts the Economy of the Country
● The effect on Wealth: If the prices of
the stocks are depreciating, then, it will discourage the buyers from
investing more money in buying shares. The people also spend less on
buying goods and products, which brings the GDP of the country
down, as consumer spending is the major component of GDP.
Consequently, the stock market will further go down impacting the
economy of the country negatively, and vice-versa.
● The effect on Pensions: Going by the
general convention, the pension funds are usually associated with the
stock market investment. Suppose, the invested funds suffer huge
losses, then, the pension funds of the government may struggle to keep
their promises of paying regular funds to retired citizens.
Chapter 6: Do the Currency Fluctuations
Affect the Economy of a Country?
Of course, we know that currency fluctuations directly impact the stock market
of a country. One question that always boggles the minds of all naïve investors
is, ‘Why do the currencies fluctuate at all?’ Well! It is the most valid question
that comes to the minds of all beginners, who are investing in shares for the first
time. As you must have seen, a few currencies are continually rising to an all-
time high, whereas others are following a downward spiral path. So, what
makes these currencies fluctuate?
One simple reason for the currencies to fluctuate is the variation in supply and
demand of the money. The amount of domestic currency circulating in the
economy of the country is majorly governed by the country’s import and export
values. When you are exporting or importing, the Indian currency is either
flowing in or out of the state. If the exports go up at a higher rate than imports,
then, it means there is more revenue earned in foreign currency. It, in turn,
indicates a reduced supply of Indian currency in the international market and,
consequently, we see an appreciation in the exchange rate of the currency.
Alternatively, if the import of the country goes up, it means the supply of our
domestic currency increases in the exchange market, resulting in its
depreciation.
An interesting question that I am often asked is, “Why does the government not
print extra currency to eradicate poverty?” This is a one million dollar question
that wrecks the minds of many. Well thought! Though, the rationale behind this
concern is right, yet, the answer to this is ‘NO,’ the government cannot do it
ever!
Why? Here is the Explanation
Distributing free currency will lead to the currency devaluation
The national wealth for any country is fixed and increases only with the
increase in the economy. Suppose the government starts distributing the
currency for free to the poor, then, the money flow increases in the country. But,
the economy or the wealth of the nation remains the same; hence, as per the
demand and supply equation, the increased supply of the currency depreciates
its value.
Distributing free currency will lead to pseudo-inflation
Imagine, if there is a sudden increase in the money in the system, then, the
demand for all goods and services will also rise subsequently. It will lead to a
rise in demand for the products which will push up their prices further.
Consequently, this leads to pseudo-inflation, which will ensure that you buy the
same number of products as before but against an extra cost. Thus, in both
situations, we are back to square one.
Let Us Understand this with an Example
Suppose your monthly income is Rs. 10, and you purchase one pen with it every
month. Now suddenly, the government tells you that it will deposit Rs. 500 in
your account every month. So, out of euphoria, what will you do? You have
access to easy money, and thus you will naturally spend on things that you
always desired. Therefore, earlier if you just bought one pen each month, now,
you will buy five different pens, other stationery, some snacks, a movie ticket,
etc. Your increased income will fuel the increased desires, and that will lead to
increased demands for products in general.
As a thumb rule, when the demand for commodities is more, their price
automatically rises, resulting in inflation. Thus, the same pen that you were
buying for 10 rupees will now be available to you for 500 rupees. Hence, free
currency distribution to eradicate poverty will instead create more debt.
One real example of ‘how currency distribution creates an economic disaster’
was seen in Zimbabwe. The Zimbabwe government had distributed free
currency to eradicate poverty from the nation, but unfortunately, free currency
distribution led to hyperinflation in the country. The prices of all the
commodities rose so much that with 15$ US currency you could buy three eggs
in Zimbabwe. Let us see what happened in Zimbabwe in detail.
A long time ago, the then President of Zimbabwe, Mr. Mugabe, had all
intentions of eradicating poverty from his nation. And thus, he took big pieces
of land from the whites and redistributed it equally amongst the ethnic
Zimbabweans. This led to the collapse of the banking and agricultural sectors of
the country, which in turn triggered unemployment in the country. Thus, the
nation started printing more and more currency and distributed it widely
amongst its population. But the value and faith in currency were lost, leading to
hyperinflation. The inflation rose from 19% to 48% in just one year. And, then
there was nothing left that could check this hyperinflation.
Inflation further continued to rise for the next 17 years in Zimbabwe, and, at one
point banknotes of denomination Z$100,000,000 were needed for addressing
simple daily needs. This is the biggest lesson for all the countries across the
world, whoever thought of eradicating poverty by printing more currency.
Finally, Zimbabwe had to import a foreign currency to bring the prices back to
normal. But it took a long time for Zimbabwe to overcome the financial crisis.
Is Currency Devaluation Always Harmful?
The most logical answer to this question is Yes, but, in reality, this is not always
true! Currency devaluation may not always turn out to be harmful to the
country. In reality, the effect of currency devaluation is always valued against
the balance of trade of the country. Suppose the country’s exports are higher
than its imports, then, the foreign reserves of the nation go up. Hence, the
currency value appreciates and vice-versa.
So, when the nation’s currency depreciates, it sets an alert to push the exports
more, which otherwise gets ignored. Therefore, it is wrong to say that currency
devaluation is harmful at all times, because if the currency devaluation is
handled well, then, it, in turn, pushes the exports, increasing foreign reserves.
Chapter 7: Stock Investment Versus Other
Financial Investments
You would agree that Gold is always the first choice whenever we wish to
invest our excess money. If the amount is more, then definitely the choice is
land. There are other options available, as well. But are we actually aware
which of these assets will fetch the maximum returns?
The information below is going to be quite useful to you if you belong to that
majority which is unaware of the exact return on assets.
How do Equity, Debentures, Property and Gold Investments Work?
Debentures
While investing in debentures, you get a fixed rate of interest, but there is no
sharing of the profits earned by the company. So, here, your returns are limited
to just ‘fixed returns’; plus you get back the principal sum invested.
Property
Investing in property demands a huge amount of capital. There are a lot of
parameters for a property to be liquid, i.e. location, the type of land, etc. It takes
a lot of time for the property to appreciate its value. Therefore, for you to fetch
substantial returns, you will have to be patient and stay invested for a long
duration.
Gold
Gold serves as the primary attraction for all investors who are looking at
gaining a substantial amount of money. Over the past many decades, the
increase in demand for gold has led to a considerable appreciation in the value
of gold. But, sadly there is not much use of gold as such, as the money gets
trapped unless the possessed gold is liquidated. Moreover, no business basics
can be applied with gold to grow the money further.
Equity
Equity is perceived to be a riskier investment bet as compared to various other
asset classes such as gold, land, and bonds. But, in reality, it is a much better
option due to its accessibility, liquidity, historically better returns, etc.
Equity investment is by far the best investment option, as by buying stakes in a
company, you become the owner of the company. As the business owners earn
profits in businesses, likewise in equity investment, you are the first-hand
receivers of the company’s profits. Moreover, returns on equity fetch you much
better profit percentage as compared to other asset classes as you are also
bearing the risk of loss in the business by owning it.
Thus, equity investment does outperform other popular asset investments such
as gold or land, provided you invest your money with the right approach. Now,
let us see how much returns each of these asset classes gave in the last 18 years.
CAGR Return on different Asset Class in the last 18 Years from 2001 to
2019
Time Period – 18 years.
Gold AAA Bond FD Real Estate Sensex
Corpus (cid:0) (cid:0) (cid:0)
Amount (cid:0) 76,900.00 (cid:0) 47,171.00 43,425.00 65,435.00 116,231.00
Rate of
return 12% 9% 8.50% 11% 14.60%
From the graph above, it is evident that gold fetched almost 12% returns, real
estate brought 11% returns, FD fetched 8.5% returns, AAA Bond (debentures)
fetched 9% returns, but Sensex topped the list with more than 14 % returns. So,
the stock investment can get you the highest returns. You won’t get this sort of
return with any other investment class such as gold, property, and debt.
The worst thing is that investing in stocks is still considered to be the last option
in India.
Other Benefits of Stock Investment Besides Promising Returns:
o Long-term capital gains being taxed at a lower rate.
o The stock investment brings regular income as dividends, and the
investment capital value also appreciates with time. Moreover, the historical
returns in stocks have been much more than in other asset classes.
o While investing in stocks, there are no threats such as theft as in gold or
illegal occupation as in the case of property.
o The stock market offers high liquidity and ease of transaction
So Is It Like Equities Outperform Other Asset Classes Every Time?
So, the straightforward answer is – No. Though equities have impressively
outperformed the other asset classes in the past, yet, it cannot outperform All
the asset classes all the time.
Compounding – The Force Behind Wealth
Creation in Stocks
Do you know that the small investments that you make today, go on to bear
huge profits over a period of time with the power of compounding?
So what is Compounding?
Compounding is a process in which an investment’s earnings that are earned either
from capital appreciation or interest are reinvested to generate additional income
over time. This growth is calculated using exponential functions and occurs
because earnings will be generated from both the initial principal amount and the
accumulated earnings.
Compounding
So, in school, we were using this equation = P (1+R/100)N
Where, P= Principal, R= Rate of return, N= number of years
The same equation is presented as
I (1+CAGR/100)T
Where I = Initial Amount
CAGR = Compounded Annual Growth Rate
T= Time (Number of Years)
In simple words, compounding is similar to compound interest and is
referred to as Compounded Annual Growth Rate.
So, in compounding you are earning profits in two ways:
1. From the principal value
2. From the additional earnings through interest which are reinvested to
give magnified returns.
No wonder that compounding is referred to as the ‘Interest of Interest’.
Compounding is often measured in terms of CAGR (Compounded Annual
Growth Rate).
Compounding has the magical power to magnify a small investment in the long
run, which is why it is referred to as the 8th wonder of the world.
How Does Compounding Work?
We are all caught up in a rat race of multiplying our money every day. To meet
our financial goals, we tend to save more and spend less. While saving is
essential, its rewards can be compounded if we invest our savings intelligently.
So, let’s understand how it works…
For example, if you have Rs 10,000 and you invested it in a fixed deposit at a
rate of 7% interest per annum.
Particulars Withdrawing your interest Reinvesting your interest
component component
Investment Value 10,000 10,000
Interest rate P.A. 7% 7%
Time Period 30 years 30 years
Total interest Income 21000 66000
Total wealth 31000 76000
Money is multiplied by 3.1 times 7.6 times
The amount of Rs 10,000 has become 76000 in 30 years just by keeping in fixed
deposits due to the compounding effect. Now, if you had invested the same sum
of money on a simple interest-bearing instrument or if you would have
withdrawn your interest on an annual basis, your corpus would have been Rs
31000 in 30 years, which is less than half of the former. The difference is
clearly visible from the graph shown below -
From the above example, it is clear that compounded returns significantly
outperform the returns gained from simple interest. Hence, to meet your long-
term goals, it is extremely important to invest your money in financial assets
like stocks to get compounded returns.
Let us understand this with an example. Suppose you have to save for your
child’s higher education.
In this example, you had the required corpus for your child’s education as per
today’s cost (Rs 8 lacs). But you need the money after 20 years when your child
is actually ready for higher education. So, you invested the money in a fixed
deposit for 20 years. Now, let us take a look at the returns after considering
inflations and taxation. After making the calculation, we found that your
investment has ended up with a deficit of Rs. 3.98 lacs.
So, did you see how fruitful it is to invest money in a fixed deposit? When you
have long-term goals like child education, child marriage, buying a house or
car, retirement, etc., keeping money in a savings account or fixed deposit will
definitely not work.
How Much Can I Earn?
Let’s see how much your corpus would have been if you had put your money
just in an index fund.
From the above graph, it is clear that the Sensex was at a level of 778 in the
year 1989 and now it is trading at a level of 36600, which means nearly 14%
CAGR for 30 years, which is double of your FD returns. So, your investment
worth 10,000 would have been around Rs 4.7 crore if you had just replicated the
index, i.e. 617 times of your fixed deposit corpus.
The market generally offers an average return of 14-15% per annum. But if you
select stocks carefully, you can even beat the market return.
Let’s Understand This With Examples-
Wipro
If a person had invested Rs 10,000 in 1980, the money would have become Rs
550 crore approximately in 2018.
How is it possible?
In 1980, the face value of Wipro was Rs 100 and let's assume you have bought
100 shares@ Rs 100. So, the total investment would have become Rs 10,000.
Investment worth Rs 10,000 has become 550 crores in 38 years, i.e. CAGR of 42%.
Another example, Eicher Motors
As you can see from the graph above, an investment of Rs 50,000 in Eicher
Motors shares in 1998 would have become 10.5 crores today. The company was
trading for 10.70 in 1998 and the current market price is around 21000,
generating a CAGR return of nearly 46.5% in 20 years.
These examples emphasize the importance of compounding and how staying
invested in stocks in the long term helps to earn excellent returns. Also, these
examples show the importance of investing in stocks which outweighs the
returns from FD or the interest earned from a savings account.
Source: Economic Times
Warren Buffett: A live example of achieving mega-success from stock
investment
What did Buffett do to become a billionaire from the stock investment?
Warren Buffett also called as “The Oracle of Omaha” is no genius, but he
merely discovered the power of compounding, which led him to build an asset
worth 87 billion dollars.
Here is what Warren Buffett did to become a multi-billionaire.
The wisest thing that Warren Buffett did was that he invested in shares at a very
early age, which compounded annually at 20%, for 70 long years.
Here are the reasons due to which he could create such a significant
wealth:
1. He started investing at a young age of 11
years and bought six shares of an oil company at 38$ each. Though he
eventually sold those shares at 40$ each, soon he saw that the prices of
each of those shares rebounded to 200$. It got Warren thinking about the
value of timing in trading shares. It is this value of timing that made him
what he is today.
2. Soon after doing some research, Buffett
invested in the shares of Berkshire Hathaway in 1962. And guess what?
He held those shares for many decades and is still going strong.
Currently, those very shares are worth millions of dollars with the magic
of compounding.
Learning: Warren Buffett is no genius (only in this context), but he
understood the value of investing for a long term in good stocks, and that
made him super-rich today.
Consistency is more important than Outperformance
The consistency of returns is an important factor in letting compounding
work efficiently. If the returns on a stock are not consistent each year, then
the results from compounding are not so effective. Let us understand this by
taking a look at the following example.
Suppose there are two stocks – Stock A and Stock B. Stock A gives lesser
returns but is consistent in approach, whereas Stock B gives higher returns
but is inconsistent in approach.
Stock A Stock B
Market price YOY Market price YOY
return return
Purchase 100 - 250 -
date
1 st year 120 20% 350 40%
2nd year 138 15% 300 -14%
3 rd Year 168 22% 220 -27%
4 th year 195 16% 300 36%
5 th year 222 14% 350 17%
Total returns in 5 years 87% Total returns in 5 years 52%
You can see that Stock A has outperformed stock B due to consistency in
returns. It shows that the power of compounding works efficiently when the
returns are consistent. It is evident from the table above.
The stock market is the place where consistent investments for an extended
period surely pay off. But staying invested for an extended period comes
with its challenges, like:
● You must stay invested even when the
stock market has crashed.
● You must refrain from selling stocks
when the stocks are trading at excellent prices. History has proven that
it is essential to stay invested consistently over a long period, instead
of disinvesting to encash the extra profits when the stock outperforms.
Wealth Creation in Stocks Through the Power of Compounding
Compounding works best when you buy good stocks that are undervalued
currently, and stay invested in them for an extended period. The graph below
shows the business life cycle indicating the various phases that occur in every
business.
Fig: Business life cycle
If you understand this critical benefit that you get out of long-term
investment, then, you will never be tempted towards gambling.
Every business follows a lifecycle comprising the launch phase, the growth
phase, the shakeout phase, the maturity phase, and the decline phase. As an
investor, your job is to find a fast-growing company that is in the growth
phase, but whose stock is valued like a slow-growing company. It means to
buy shares of a promising company whose shares are trading at a lower
price than their fair price.
The underlying principle of stock investment states that your profits are
defined by the price at which you procure a stock. No wonder the company
you have chosen could be the best in the world, but you will make good
profits only if you have bought its stocks at the right price. For example,
companies such as Britannia, HUL, Asian Paints, etc. appear to be a likely
bet, but their shares are highly overpriced. Thus, the stock value of these
companies might not serve as a profitable investment option.
Hence, I would like to mention again that, ‘you must look for a company
which is in a growth phase, but its shares must be trading at a lower price
such as the shares of a company in its launch phase.’ Or, you must look for a
company in the maturity phase offering shares at a value equivalent to the
company in the growth phase and so on.
The rule of 72
The rule of 72 is widely applied by all the financial analysts and the stock
investment firms to calculate their income on the investments made. It states
that for an investment to double up, there is a formula used, which is
mentioned here:
Double returns = 72 / rate of return
For example, if the rate of interest is 10%, then, in how many years will your
money double up?
Double returns = 72/10 = 7.2 years,
Hence, your money will double in 7.2 years.
Another example, if the rate of interest is 18% then,
Double returns = 72/18 = 4 years
Hence, your money will double up in 4 years.
The major setback of using this rule is that it is restrictive to calculate only
double returns on the investment value. If you are looking at exhaustive
returns, then the power of compounding is always available as an option.
Interesting Tip: 1. Compounding only works when the investor avoids
negative years and stays invested even when the stock prices have taken an
unexpected dip.
2. The stock market has multiple winners and losers at any point in time, as
it gives a chance to win or lose concurrently.
Chapter 8: The Psychology Behind Stock
Investment
Stock market investment is for everyone who has the willingness and the
patience to learn the art of investing in it. People from all backgrounds and
professions like computer professionals, teachers, architects, designers,
astronauts, homemakers, students, artists, restaurateurs, etc. can learn how to
invest in stocks.
Stocks are the sure-shot money multipliers, as I always keep saying, provided
you know how to play the game. But stock investment has a lot more to it than
just trading which you will understand once you read further. You would be
surprised to see how much fun and exciting it is to learn how to observe,
analyze, and react to the stock market.
Learning how to invest in stocks will make you much wiser in your investment
deals. It will increase your chances of churning wealth by many folds. The more
you try to understand how the stock investment works, the more intrigued it
makes you.
The Psychology of a Naïve Investor
The following is a list of common beliefs from the world of investing. Check
whether you carry them too!
• You look at the stock market investment like a money-making tool rather
than looking at it as a means to create wealth.
• You have low risk-taking ability. You prefer to invest in low priced stocks
assuming lower risks involved, without knowing the credentials of the
companies.
• You operate from fear psychology and refrain from investing in high-priced
stocks even if those stocks are promising, due to the fear of loss.
• You believe in selling off shares too early because of the fear of losing
money in case the market fluctuates shortly.
If yes, then there is nothing to worry about, as these beliefs come naturally
when you start as a stock investor. But lucky you to have picked up this book,
as despite being a novice, you would see how experienced world-known
investors approach stock investment.
The Psychology of a Smart Investor
The smart investor has burnt his fingers already by losing in the quest to earn
more. It is this experience of losing money, which turns a naïve investor into a
seasoned investor. The wise men on Earth said that there are always two ways
of learning:
One is by making mistakes and learning from them.
Second is by learning from the mistakes made by others.
But, intelligent people always tend to learn from the mistakes made by others.
So, you must imitate the wiser of the lot and learn from their experiences.
Here Is What You Need to Learn:
The points below are crucial to remember as you start your journey as an
investor. You may take them as ‘Thumb-Rules’.
● Before investing in any stock, you need to do a detailed
fundamental analysis of the company. It is the best and the most reliable way
of investing in stocks.
● Your next-door neighbours or your well-meaning relatives
cannot be your investment advisors ever. Though they are the ones who are the
most convincing and influencing, they cannot be your best financial advisors
always. And, you may not agree to it now, but after you have finished reading
this book, you would agree that you are your own best financial decision-
maker.
• When you invest in stocks, you attentively read all the news related to those
companies. But, just in case you come across a piece of information that
appears to be insider information, then, be sure that it is deliberately made
public. A retail investor can be assured of the fact that if insider information
has reached him, it is because it was intended to reach.
• The electronic media, financial dailies, and online portals are not
information-driven, but they are instead hired to keep making constant noise.
Another way of putting it is that the media disguise noise as information. The
intent is only to keep you hooked. By the way, have you ever pondered that
these news channels have been around for 20 years, which means, they must
have made you the masters of stock investment by now. But, have you come
anywhere close to learning the basics of stock investment?
Unlike in Science, there is no fixed formula in stock investment to make profits,
nor can you control the key factors to get the desired outcome. So, the stock
market gains cannot be calculated in advance using any fixed formula or
equation. The stock market investment is an art that needs to be learnt with
experience and knowledge.
Chapter 9: Understanding Stock
Investment Strategically
Investing in stocks comes with its own set of rules or conventions. If you have
to do too many calculations for buying a stock, then, it’s usually not worth
investing in that stock. Usually, human psychology is such that, if you spend
long hours researching a product, then, you are somehow convinced about
buying it.
There are various aspects to stock investing. Every company will have its
specific challenges related to the sector it belongs to. As an investor, you must
understand the industry-specific challenges, as a challenge to survive in
business changes with the changing industry.
For example, as CEO of Apple, one needs to continually forecast, innovate and
break heads in doing R&D constantly, as the products will sustain in the market
only if the relevant innovation is brought in. But as the CEO of Coca-Cola, the
challenge lies in maintaining the same old product and increasing its market
share across the globe. The challenge here lies in not changing the product at all
and still ensuring its relevance in changing times. So, each business comes with
its own set of broad challenges, and you must understand the basics of that
business before investing in it.
As successful leading investors put it, ‘The safest bet is to invest in those
businesses which even an idiot can run because someday an idiot will run it.’
For example, if you have two options, Coca-Cola and Apple, then, investing in
Coca-Cola would be a lot safer than investing in Apple. Remember, I am using
the word safer, not more rewarding. So, which stock is right for you depends on
your objectives.
Qualities You DON’T Need to Be a Good Investor
● High IQ
● Technical, mathematical and accounting skills
● Expensive software to analyze complex graphs, and charts
Qualities You Need to Be a Good Investor
● Patience
● Courage to go against the market trends
● Learning ability
● Emotional stability
● Willingness to give up short-term desires to build enormous wealth in
the future
These qualities are needed due to the nature of the stock market, which is highly
fluctuating and unpredictable.
Chapter 10: Value Investing – The
Investment Strategy to Get Better ROI
The concept of ‘Value investing’ was developed by Benjamin Graham and David
Dodd in 1934. Value investing is a tested philosophy used by stock investment
experts like Charlie Munger, Warren Buffet, Peter Lynch, etc.
The investors mentioned above have been able to create immense wealth from
stock investment only by using value investing. This concept is simple and
sustainable and can be followed across the globe.
“In the short run, the market is a voting machine, but in the long run, it is
a weighing machine.”
– BENJAMIN GRAHAM
Value investing aims at buying stocks that are under-priced due to market
dynamics. Value investors constantly search for stocks that are sold at a value
less than their fair value.
What’s the ‘Big Deal’ about Value Investing?
1. Value investing is preferred as it has a proven track record of more than 60
years. All proven names such as Benjamin Graham, Warren Buffet, Charlie
Munger, Peter Lynch, etc. have created wealth through it.
2. It has been a tried and tested formula across global markets, and in all
market conditions.
3. Value investing has helped investors earn Index beating returns
consistently.
4. The concept of value investing is based on extremely logical and sensible
assumptions.
5. It is simple to understand and can be practised by both full time and part-
time investors as well as beginners with not much of accounting
knowledge.
Going by the thumb rule, the best way to judge any theory is to examine its
assumptions. Value investing, like most other approaches, has a set of
assumptions. Let’s analyze those assumptions:
Value Investing Is Based on the Following Assumptions:
1. Every stock has an Intrinsic Value attached to it. The intrinsic value is the
actual value of the company, which is calculated by considering all
tangible and intangible aspects of the company.
2. Every stock eventually trades around its fair value in the long run.
3. Markets are not entirely efficient in the short run.
The father of value investing, Benjamin Graham (also the teacher of Warren
Buffett) explained that the market rewards the good companies and punishes the
bad companies in the long run. Therefore it is always suggested to not look at
the frequent price fluctuations in stocks while investing.
Often, it is seen that investors start with good positive intentions, but when they
see their friends earning more by doing risky trades, they dump their investing
philosophy and start copying others’ behaviour. Such things might reward in the
short run, but prove deadly in the long term.
Was Your Stock Purchase a Good Deal? Ways to Find Out
The price you pay for the stock is what makes it a good or a bad buy. For
example, if you buy an iPhone at a 40% discount, then that is a great purchase,
but when you buy the same iPhone for anything higher than its labelled price, it
becomes a bad purchase.
Fortunately, in the physical world, we have the concept of Maximum Retail
price or sticker price, wherein the price of the product is decided by the
company that owns it. But in the stock market, the price is decided by people
like you and me, and therefore, there is no fixed price that is fair. It is up to the
individual to do his or her calculations and decide the fair price of the stock
they want to buy.
So for investor X, the fair price of Maruti Suzuki could be Rs. 1000. While for
investor Y, it could be Rs. 500. It shows that what’s expensive for me might not
be expensive for you or somebody else.
Eventually, everything boils down to the expectations of the investors. If you
believe that Apple, as a company, will grow at a fast rate in the future, you will
readily pay a higher price. On the contrary, I may carry doubts about the future
of Apple so I won't be willing to pay the price agreed by you. Therefore, such
expectations make your ‘fair price’ for buying Apple’s share different from
mine.
Choosing the price of a stock is similar to how players are auctioned in IPL or
EPL. Every team bids for the players according to its expectations from them.
Higher the expectations, higher is the price they are willing to pay. Similarly, if
you expect fantastic performance from a company in the coming years, you
would be willing to pay a far higher price. Since everyone’s expectations are
different, the estimates of a fair price are also different.
“Every stock has a fair value” which shows a range within which you think it is
a reasonable buy. And I am sure you would agree that we don’t buy anything,
without checking its pricing. So why should it be different for stocks? In later
chapters, we will study how to calculate the fair price of a stock, based on your
expectations from the company.
Benjamin Graham’s Beliefs on Value Investing
He stated that any investment without surety of good returns is called
speculating and not investing. As per the definition of Investing by Ben
Graham, investing necessarily comprises of the following two traits:
1. The investment must be safe at all times
2. The returns on the investment must be adequate
Let Us Discuss These Two Traits in Detail
1. The investment must be safe at all times
What we as investors understand as “Risk” is often just uncertainty or volatility.
We assess risk based on market fluctuations or volatility rather than gauging the
actual risk. But, when it comes to serious investing, the risk in investing is only
when you are not able to achieve the desired returns. It has got nothing to do
with current stock price fluctuations.
Now, let us understand this by taking an example of two graphs depicting the
variations in
the stock
price over a
period of
time.
From the above graph, it is evident that the share price has not fluctuated much,
which means the share price is not volatile. But another point to note from the
graph is that the stock price has not increased in the last three years. So, would
you not consider this as a risk? Of course, yes! Because your ultimate motto of
earning from this investment is not served.
In the above graph, the stock price has been fluctuating, indicating huge
volatility, but the share price has increased from 900 to 1600. Here, although
there is high fluctuation in the pricing, yet in the end, the investors’ profits are
ensured.
So, by looking at the above two graphs, we can conclude that risk and volatility
are two different things and should not be confused with each other.
Investment Tip: Never buy stocks by merely looking at the prices. Get into the
core analysis to understand the true worth of a company, before investing a
single penny into it.
2. The return on investment must be adequate
Investing, when done for a long period, is considered to be safe. The only
concern, in long term investing, is whether it brings you adequate returns or not.
The word ‘adequate’ cannot be justified ever as the expectation of each investor
varies. For example, a mere 7% return on FD may be a good investment for me,
but the same does not hold for somebody expecting a 20% return on the same
value.
Hence, for any monetary investment to qualify as ‘INVESTMENT,’ it must be
free of the risk of losing money (to be read as—minimal risk of losing money),
and it must fetch satisfactory returns for the investor.
Chapter 11: Stock Investment Strategy
The big names like Warren Buffet and Charlie Munger have mesmerized the
entire world by creating immense fortune through stock investment. Of course,
each one of us would want to know the critical aspects of a stock investment
that can help us mint money like them.
So here are a few helpful aspects of stock investment, which will give you
new insights into it.
● Stock investment is an art that needs to be learnt. The principles of
investment are quite simple and worth learning. Stock investment can
fetch you huge wealth provided you learn to invest.
● Though trading is not very meaningful in the long run, you will still see
the majority of people investing in stocks only to trade.
● There is no surety of returns in trading. At times you would see the
speculators making a lot of money in stocks, and at other times you will
find them losing all of it.
● Sometimes even after thorough research and analysis, you would not be
able to make the expected money, and you may also incur losses. This is
normal and which is why I say, ‘stock investment is an art.’
The aforementioned aspects are related to investing. But, since you would
invest in the ‘market’, below are a few aspects related to the market:
● The stock market is a transparent trading medium providing equal
opportunities to all the investors and businesses.
● The stock market is highly irrational, and the stock prices may fluctuate
suddenly from high to low, and vice-versa, without any prior indication.
● There is no need to hurry up in picking stocks ever as the stock market
brings up a new deal each day. When a bull market begins, the bear
market ends and vice-versa, and this cycle keeps repeating itself on and
off. So, you get regular ample opportunities to invest or disinvest in
stocks.
● In the stock market, trading depends on the market news outbreak
resulting in a fall and rise in stock prices every day. But, if you are
approaching stock investment as a wealth creator, then such market
distractions will be of little help.
● You must have seen many stock investment disasters or must have heard
of many such cases. Such disasters happen due to:
a. Investors spending way too much money at once, anticipating
money returns, increasing the risk of losing it all.
b. Investors choose stocks on shared tips and popularity, not based
on the true valuation of stocks.
c. Investors tend to buy and sell stocks with market fluctuations,
which are often non-productive.
d. Over diversification of portfolio not fetching productive returns.
The stock market has just two extreme perspectives, which are favourable and
unfavourable. Normally, in favourable circumstances, you see a ‘high buy-sell
price,’ and in unfavourable circumstances, you see a ‘low buy-sell price.’
● As per me, the intelligent approach is always:
When speculators/traders buy, then, you must hold.
When speculators/traders sell, then, you must buy.
I know this would not make much of a sense to you at this point of time,
but this is explained in detail in further chapters as you read on.
● Always remember that there are twin
aspects of money-making, which are:
1. Risk
2. Rewards
The rewards should always be higher than the perceived risks. If the
perceived risk is higher than the expected returns in the current market
scenario, then, the investor must introspect the market and should refrain
from picking up new stocks. It is so because any wrong investments may
result in losing all the money earned so far.
● For each investor, every new transaction
either teaches a new lesson or increases conviction in the old one.
● Another good thing about the stock
market is that you can afford to make a few mistakes as long as you make
the right investments, the rest of the time. Good investments overshadow
a few errors that you may have made.
● If an investor has been lucky enough to
fetch good returns for a few initial years or more consecutively, then, they
usually mistake themselves as confident investors. This overconfidence
often brings in unfavourable results, as the investors take high
uncalculated risks to earn more.
● Stock investment is indeed one of the
most promising and most rewarding businesses ever. It brings you a huge
benefit of making money without getting involved in it. There is no
headache of running a business and taking care of the various aspects of
it, and yet you get great profits out of it. You leave your hard-earned
money in the safest hands of visionaries like Azim Premji, Ratan Tata,
etc. And, all that business ever needs is the right people to drive it with
the right approach to make it successful. So, your money surely is in the
safest hands!
• Stock investment is the most flexible strategy as you have the
liberty of buying multiple stocks of all promising companies
from different sectors.
• With just one click of a mouse, you can exit from your equity
investment in only a few seconds, unlike in a full-fledged
business where you need a few months to a few years to shut
it down. Isn’t this a great deal to place your bets on?
• The Profits earned from Stock investment are Non-Linear. In the
stock market investment, the expenses are linear as they
have to be paid every month, but the profits come irregularly
in bunches depending on how your invested stocks are
doing. So, the benefits accumulate for years together to fetch
you a substantial income over the years.
Staying invested in the stock market for a long time is the basic success mantra.
Warren Buffett would have never become ‘The Warren Buffet’ if he had sold
Coca-Cola in two months or even two years. He became the richest man on
Earth because:
● He Bought Good Stocks and bought them at reasonable prices.
● He held those stocks for 10 years or more.
Investment Tip:
1. Do you know that ‘out of the total investments made, only 10% genuinely
contribute towards the wealth creation and the rest 90% go waste?’ This
happens with all the investors, including the big names in the business.
2. Successful stock market investors are
continuous learners. There are NO experts in Stock market investment.
Success Mantra: Money-making in the stock market is essential, but being able
to retain the earned money is even more critical. An investor needs to hold a
stock if it has doubled in its value because the power of compounding will
multiply its worth many times over the years. Instead of thinking of selling a
stock that has increased in its value, the investor must look at buying more
shares of the same company, if he sees excellent business prospects ahead.
Warren Buffet suggests a simple strategy which states that imagine you were
given just 20 travel tickets to travel for a lifetime. And, every time you travel,
you exhaust one travel card. So, how would your approach to travelling be?
Would you not think 100 times before travelling, as you have ONLY 20
chances to travel?
Of course, yes! This is exactly how an experienced investor thinks! He performs
an in-depth analysis only to take assured stock picks. It is the level of maturity
and understanding that segregates an experienced investor from a beginner. All
successful investors invest in a company as the owner of the company and not
just as a mere investor.
Chapter 12: The Two Approaches to
Investing
Value investing is more of an art and less of a science. Though, there are no
rigid rules for investing, yet, there is a basic framework which needs to be
followed.
For example, let’s consider a sport like cricket. There are a few basic rules in it,
but players are free to play the way they want. In cricket, both Dravid and
Sehwag are highly successful batsmen despite their contrasting playing styles.
Similarly, in investing, if you know the basic rules, you are free to experiment
and develop your own style.
The Two Approaches to Investing
The question that knocks most on the minds of investors is, ‘Which stock to
invest in?’ Out of the 5,000+ listed companies, how would you choose the best
stocks? Of course, you cannot analyze all the listed companies, that’s
impossible. So how would you list down the companies you want to analyze?
Here are the two ways to do it:
Top-Down Approach
In the top-down approach, you first select a particular sector to invest, and then
the best company in that sector.
To Select the Sector, the Following Parameters Are Used:
• The Sector is out of favour – Check if the chosen sector has faced
problems in the past. You must carefully invest in the company if you
see good growth of the sector in the future despite all odds. Example:
Pharma sector is currently fighting the odds in the US due to US FDA
issues. So, this sector has a negative sentiment amongst investors, but
there is good hope of finding cheap stocks.
• Check the future growth in the Sector. For example, driverless cars and e-
commerce will surely grow in the future.
• Change in government regulations – Government can come up with new
regulatory laws to favour a particular sector. For example, the
government imposed anti-dumping duty on tyres, which
helped in protecting the Indian tyre companies from
cheap Chinese products.
• Technology improvements – Sometimes, a new technological
intervention can benefit the entire sector. For example, increased use of
solar panels made solar power companies more powerful.
Bottom-up Approach
This is the exact opposite of the top-down approach. Here, you don’t look for a
particular sector; rather, you are open to buying stocks from any industry. In the
bottom-up approach, you choose those stocks which meet your valuation
criteria. In this approach, you can select stocks through:
• Known Companies – Look for companies whose products you like, such
as Colgate, Bata, Gillette, etc. — choosing companies based on products
makes sense because as a consumer, you know if the products sold by
these companies are liked by the people or not.
• Companies related to your job – If you are a doctor, pharma companies
are a good bet. If you are a software engineer, IT companies are a good
bet. Opting for these companies make sense as you would possess a lot
of knowledge about companies related to your profession.
• NEWS: Newspapers, magazines and even advertisements function as a
tool to bring new companies to your notice. If you find that a new car
has suddenly got a lot of media attention, or you see too many of them
on the roads suddenly, it’s usually a nice idea to start researching about
the company.
Which of the Two Approaches Is Correct?
The best part about investing is that you have the freedom to decide how to
invest as per your preferences. Please remember, it doesn’t matter which
approach you choose, the process of analyzing the stock remains unchanged.
(This will be elaborated in the next chapter.)
These approaches will just help you short-list the stocks to help the research
process become easier.
Chapter 13: How to Analyze Stocks in
Order to Filter the Good Ones?
Life, as we know, is highly unpredictable. But, if you stay disciplined and
focussed, you can manage the significant components of your life like success,
health, and family goals. Likewise, if you approach investing with a focussed
approach, you can create enormous wealth. In investing, fortunately, there are
always a few things you can do to increase your probability of success in
investment.
So now let us break down the process of analyzing a stock in detail. This
chapter and the following chapters share a detailed holistic process of analyzing
the stocks. So, let's understand in this chapter what the essential components of
stock analysis are.
Value investing in stocks breaks down to the following components:
Now, let us discuss each of the analytical components, namely industrial
analysis, business analysis, management, valuation, and behavioural analysis
separately in detail.
1. Industry Analysis
A fish is always limited by the size of its pond. So, as an investor, you don’t
want to enter into an industry that is not growing. You are here to make money,
but, for that, it is imperative to get the process right. You need to understand the
happenings of the industry, how it is performing, what its positives and
negatives are. All this will sum up to give you a fair idea of how prospering this
industry will be in the future, which will ultimately decide your investment’s
profits.
Interestingly, each industry has a set of parameters to gauge its performance.
For instance, the book value of a company is highly important in banking or real
estate stocks, while it is not required in the IT sector. For telecom companies,
Average Revenue Per User (ARPU) is taken into account, while for the
commodity sector, the production cost or book value is looked into.
So, how would you figure out the parameters required to gauge an industry? To
help you out, here is a theory which is called, “Porter’s Five Forces” model,
which has been explained in a separate chapter later.
2. Business Analysis
In the words of the famous stock investor Warren Buffett, “Buy a business that
even an idiot can run because someday, an idiot will run it.”
As an investor, you need to develop a keen eye to analyze businesses that you
pick up. Every business comes with its own set of pluses and minuses. And, one
business can be entirely different from another even within the same sector. For
example, Tech Mahindra focuses on telecom software, while Accelaya makes
software solutions for airline industries. Now whether you should buy Mahindra
or Accelaya, depends on whether you are optimistic about the airline or telecom
industry. So while both these companies fall in the IT sector, the reality is much
different, because one IT company can be a contrast to the other. Thus, business
analysis helps us to understand and interpret the business model of a company.
The same has been discussed in detail in a separate chapter.
3. Management Analysis
“When a management with a reputation for brilliance tackles a business with a
reputation for bad economics, it is the reputation of the business that remains
intact.”
Top management is the key driver of a business. The growth of a company
depends on the capability of the top management. Thus, to identify good stocks,
you need to evaluate all the intangible and tangible factors of the company. The
tangible factors have been discussed under the valuation ratio analysis further.
Here, we will look at the main intangible factor, which is the top management
of the company.
How to evaluate the management of the company?
Well! Honestly said it is not very easy to assess the top management of a
company, as most of its aspects are intangible. Moreover, the performance of
senior management has to be measured in both thick and thin, which is highly
time-consuming. But history has proved that smart investors have been able to
make the right judgements, which led them to invest wisely. Their immense
worth generated from stock investments undoubtedly goes on to say that where
there is a will, there is a way!
Fortunately, you have a checklist at your disposal to keep you safe and secure
from a bumpy investment ride. Please remember that while assessing any
company, you must look for honesty, transparency, competency, and passion
as traits which must be reflected from their management practices. These are the
four pillars on which the strong foundation of a company is built.
The top management involves the high-level executives of the firm, such as
directors, CEO, CFO, etc. When we talk about a company having good or bad
control, we are referring to the top officials of the company who have the
decision-making power with them. Please remember, as shareholders, you are
the owners of the company which is run and managed by top management.
Hence it is crucial to evaluate them before investing in the company.
The key parameters to evaluate the management of a company have been
discussed in detail in a separate chapter of this book.
4. Behavioural Analysis
As individuals, we make rational decisions to support our living, but even when
we act in our best interests, many of our judgements prove to be wrong. This is
so because we take decisions from an emotional space deep inside.
Now, while charting the course of life, there are many experiences (both good
and bad) and learnings that happen on the way. These experiences define our
liking or disliking, feelings, and emotions which sum up to form our opinions
and interpretations. So, behavioural biases, comprising of opinions, feelings,
perceptions, and emotions, come in our way of making rational decisions. They
also show up clearly when we choose stocks.
The biggest setback of having these biases around is that these biases
overshadow the facts and misguide our investments. Hence, to overcome these
biases, one must know how various biases work and influence our decisions in
daily life.
Have you ever noticed that any loss pricks you harder than your gains? So, if
you notice, we remember the loss for a longer period than the gains. In stock
investment, too, ‘the loss of an investor pricks him twice as hard as the joy of
gains.’
In the financial world, this belief is put across in the form of a theory which is
called ‘the Prospect Theory’. As per this theory, our perceived loss is different
from our perceived gain. The fact remains that the loss and gain arouse
different intensity of sadness and comfort in an investor. Of course, it is this
feeling of pleasure and pain, which influences your next investment move.
5. Valuation Analysis
Valuation analysis is done to estimate the approximate worth of a business. It
involves the scientific approach to analyze the assets of a business, though there
is a bit of art involved in it as well. By using this tool, you can find out the
growth margins, the capital expenses, the profits, financing choices, etc.
Valuation Analysis helps in figuring out the intrinsic value of a share. It is a
great tool to compare two or more companies’ performances within the same
sector. You also get a fair idea of estimating returns on your investment over a
given period.
Financial valuation of a company involves analyzing its annual report. It helps
an investor to understand whether the stock price is overvalued, undervalued, or
rightly valued. This information is of paramount importance in choosing to
invest in stocks.
The key parameters needed to evaluate a business have been discussed in detail
in the following chapters.
Chapter 14: Michael Porter’s Five Forces
Framework for Industrial Analysis
One of the crucial steps in picking stocks is to analyze the industry to which the
chosen company belongs. After all, the size of the fish is limited by the size of
the pond, meaning that the profits of a company depend on its own growth and
also on the growth of the industry. So Michael Porter’s Five Forces model was
designed to do industry analysis.
The Five Forces model is an analytical tool to understand the economic viability
of a company concerning its industry. It was designed by Michael Porter in the
year 1979 and its relevance exists till date. This model will help you to analyze
the weaknesses and the strengths of various industries. Such analysis serves as a
tool to pick the right companies while choosing to invest in stocks.
Michael Porter’s model is used to formulate the right strategies to support the
long-term sustainability of businesses.
The success of a business in an industry is dependent on the following five
factors:
1. Barriers to entry
2. Bargaining power of buyers
3. Bargaining power of suppliers
4. Industry Rivalry
5. Threat of Substitutes
With the help of these forces, a company can understand clearly its competitive
stand in a particular industry. So, let's dig deeper.
Barriers to Entry
Barriers to entry are the challenges which bring difficulty in entering a new
business market. These challenges comprise the parameters shown above in the
picture.
When many entrants enter a trade, the competition rises, and the profit share of
each of the entrants gets smaller. Hence, the existing players ensure that the
barriers of entry to their industry are high to stop the entry of many new players.
Here is the list of questions to help you gauge how easy it is for the new
entrants to enter into the industry.
● How much capital is needed to start the
business? It is easier to enter a new market when the amount of capital
needed to start a new business is low.
● What are the government regulations and
legal barriers like trademarks, copyrights, etc. for entering the business?
If the government regulations are relaxed, then many new entrants are
expected.
● How many brands are existing in the
market? What is the brand power or the reputation of the existing brands?
● How many products of the same category
exist?
● What kind of access is provided to the
suppliers and distributors?
● How easy is it to achieve the economies
of scale?
● What is the loss of exiting from the
business?
One interesting example of high threat to entry is Facebook which is the leader
with a dominant market share in the social media industry. Due to its excellent
network, it is difficult for new players to enter the industry.
Another example is the Civil Explosive manufacturing units industry, which
offers an excellent barrier to new entrants. The government is stringent in
issuing licences to manufacture explosives, and so the existing players earn
enormous profits.
A smart investor looks for industries with less scope of new entrants as it means
more significant profit shares for the existing players.
Bargaining Power of Suppliers
Bargaining power of suppliers refers to the negotiating power with suppliers to
dominate their terms and conditions on the buyers. If the suppliers have a good
bargaining power, they sell the resources at higher prices than expected, or they
may sell inferior quality of raw materials.
In either case, the profit margins of the buyers suffer badly, which will, in turn,
negatively affect the investors’ profits.
So, to gauge the bargaining power of suppliers, the following concerns must be
addressed:
● How many suppliers exist in the market?
● What is the size of the top 10 suppliers of
the industry?
● What is the industry norm for order size
for each supply?
● What is the cost of the closest substitutes
available?
● Are the buyers capable of backward
integration with suppliers? If yes, then are there plenty of such buyers or
just a handful of them?
One real-life example with the high bargaining power of supplier is Intel. Intel
holds the majority of market share to manufacture processors for laptops and
desktop computers. It won’t be wrong to say that it is one of the biggest
suppliers of processors. So, laptop manufacturers like HP, Apple, Dell, etc. have
to purchase processors on the pricing given by Intel. It is an ideal example of
high supplier power.
Another example of the low bargaining power of suppliers is Indian Railways
that is owned by the public sector in India. Even though many companies
manufacture wagons, railways is the only buyer. Thus, the suppliers cannot
dictate their pricing terms to the railways, and they end up earning low profit
margins.
So Remember, the Suppliers Have Strong Bargaining Power When
● The number of suppliers is less than the
number of buyers.
● The resources are scarce.
● The alternatives or substitutes for the raw
materials are hardly available.
● The suppliers are dominating and may
consider forward integration with dealers.
Low bargaining power of supplier helps the companies to work on their own
terms, inviting better profits for investors.
Bargaining Power of Buyers
The bargaining power of buyers refers to the negotiating power of the buyers to
dominate their terms and conditions on the suppliers. The buyers use their
power to demand high-quality products, lower prices, and better customer
support.
The bargaining power of the buyers is strong when:
• The quantity of raw material purchased is enormous.
• The number of buyers is limited.
• There are plenty of suppliers available.
• The buyers can back integrate with suppliers.
• The substitutes for raw materials are many.
• The market is highly price sensitive.
One real-life example of the low bargaining power of buyers is railways and
pharma sector in India. In the case of pharma or FMCG companies, all 130
Crore Indians use their products. Hence, owing to a vast customer base, the
companies manage to make huge profits consistently even when their customers
switch to competitors’ products. Therefore, the bargaining power of customers,
in this case, is very less.
Bargaining power of buyers must be low so that they cannot dominate the
companies, which otherwise would hit the investors’ profits.
Threat of Substitutes
The threat of substitutes arises when the buyers have the choice to settle
conveniently with another alternative without spending much more. For
example, tea and coffee are highly compatible substitutes; if one is not
available, the buyer happily settles for the other.
So, to gauge the threat of substitutes, you must figure out the following:
• How many substitutes exist in the market?
• What is the cost incurred by the buyer in switching to a substitute?
• How are the other substitutes performing relative to the chosen product?
One real-life example of the beverage industry with a high threat of substitutes
is ‘beer and wine’. Another industry with a high threat of substitute is ‘natural
gas and petroleum’.
The threat of substitutes must be less for companies to make good profits, which
acts in the investor's favour.
Competitor’s Rivalry
The competitive rivalry of any industry depends on how profitable or
competitive an industry is.
Having too much competition can give a severe blow to your business.
Hence, to stay safe, try to find out the following:
• How many competitors exist in the market?
• What is the current size of the industry?
• What is the rate at which the industry is growing?
• What is the size of the existing top, medium, and lowest competitors?
• Are there any threats of horizontal integration?
• What is the level of promotional campaigns and advertisements done to sell
the products?
These are some of the basic questions that give you a fair idea about the
industry and its current valuations as well as expected valuations in the future. It
is not necessary to find answers to all the questions but answering even a
handful from each category can give you a fair understanding of the industry.
Competitors’ rivalry must always be low to allow companies to make a bigger
share of profits, which favours investors.
How to Use Porter’s Model to Your Advantage?
To use Porter’s model to your advantage, the following three basic steps are
followed, which are:
Step: 1: Gather information: It is indeed the most critical step in this model.
The more you research about the industry, the more you get to learn about it.
Your most important decision-making tool for stock investment is your
knowledge, so try to acquire as much knowledge as possible.
Step 2: Analyse the information
Once you have gathered all the data, you have to analyze it by posing questions
that we discussed above.
Step 3: Make Strategies
The information and analysis drawn so far will help you to come up with the
right strategies. Here are a few examples of how this information will help you
to formulate the strategies:
• If there are too many players or competitors seen in the market, it indicates the
industry is at a slow growth rate. The industry is heading towards saturation
with not much scope of survival for new entrants unless there is strong product
differentiation.
• If the suppliers are dominant, then, the profit margins are highly constrained
and are connected to the suppliers' policies. Example, the petroleum industry.
• If the entry cost is too high, the stakes or the risk of taking up the business is
very high. In such cases, you need to look at the industry growth, demand of
products, existing players, nature of the industry, etc. For example—opening a
posh hotel, opening a car showroom or a branded jewellery showroom.
The Key Takeaways from Porter’s Model
Porter’s tool is a superb tool to analyze the market, yet, it has its limitations,
like:
● Porter’s tool works out differently for
varied industries. Even, the results and interpretations may vary for
similar industries. So, every sector needs to be studied thoroughly and
solely before jumping on to any conclusions.
● This model has its limitations, which is
why it is suggested to use other analytical tools like SWOT analysis,
Value Chain Analysis, or PEST analysis.
● This model works out the best when used
for industry and not for a company.
● You must use this model where there are
at least three competitors in the industry.
● You must also take a look at the
government’s input in the recent past in the chosen industry.
● While analyzing any sector, you must see
the stages of the life cycle of the industry. The earlier stages of growth
are a bit more challenging and need to be analyzed accordingly.
● You must try to figure out if the industry
is changing for good, for bad or is stagnant to be assured of your
investment.
Reference: Porter, M.E. (2008). The Five Competitive Forces That Shape
Strategy. Harvard Business Review.
Applying Porter’s Five Forces Model to the Airline Industry
In this chapter, we discussed Porter’s five forces model that helps in detailed
industry analysis. Now, we will use the same model to see how the “Airlines”
rank up.
Barriers to Entry
It is high for the airline industry
It is not easy for any new player to enter the airline industry. The reasons are as
follows:
● Strict government regulations
● Immense capital investment
● High gestation period
These three challenges or concerns provide a definite competitive advantage to
the existing players to dominate the airline industry due to the limited entry of
new players.
Bargaining Power of Suppliers
It is very high in the airline industry.
Any aircraft is built on two major parts. One is the aircraft itself, and the other is
its jet engine. There are mainly two companies that are into commercial aircraft
manufacturing, namely:
• Airbus
• Boeing
These two companies are the major suppliers of aircraft across the world. So,
they are catering to hundreds of airlines across the globe. Thus, these two
suppliers have high negotiating powers, and the buyers are forced to pay the
price these suppliers quote.
Similarly, there are mainly three commercial jet engine manufacturers in the
world. Now again, because of their monopoly, they enjoy high bargaining
power.
Bargaining Power of Buyers
It is high for the airline industry
What do we look for while buying the air tickets? Do we look for a specific
brand? Would you be ready to pay a higher price to travel in your preferred
airline? Of course, not!
We will instead buy the cheapest available ticket. Thus to sell the seats, the
airlines keep their tickets cost low to grab as many customers as possible. These
companies do not enjoy pricing power at all.
Here, there is another example that can bring a fresh perspective to this analysis.
Paracetamol is a type of drug that is widely used and is manufactured by almost
every pharma company. But, whenever we have a fever or pain, we go out to
buy Crocin even when cheaper substitutes are readily available. And, in this
case, we don’t mind paying extra for Crocin because it doesn’t a(cid:0)ect our wallet
to a large extent (even though it is much costlier). But, when it comes to
airlines, we are not willing to pay even 10% more for a ticket, as even a 10%
premium payment substantially a(cid:0)ects our wallets.
Therefore the airlines do not have any privilege to decide the air ticket fares,
and there is no brand loyalty seen in this industry. This is precisely the reason
why Indigo is the only successful operator currently, as it chooses to operate at
a low cost as compared to its competitors.
The Threat of Substitutes
It is on a medium level in the airline industry
The nearest substitute of the airline industry can only be railways. In some
developed countries, the railways and the airlines compete to grab more
customers because the railways run on high-speed networks and o(cid:0)er the same
level of comfort as that of air travel. But, in India, the situation is quite
different. The railways o(cid:0)er superb a(cid:0)ordability at the cost of prolonged travel
time, but the airlines provide quick transportation at the expense of hiked prices.
So, there is a clear boundary between the two modes of travel which are
mutually exclusive and are not treated as substitutes to each other.
But the situation is set to change in the coming years with the introduction of
more and more high-speed rail corridors. As more and more routes are mapped
by high-speed trains, the airlines will find it increasingly tough to compete.
Industry Rivalry – It Is Medium for the Airline Industry
Due to cut-throat competition amongst airlines, many airlines have failed in the
past and have been forced to shut operations or merge with more significant
players.
Presently, we have the following players:
• Indigo
• Spice Jet
• Air India
• Go Air
• Vistara
• Air Asia
• Other Regional Players
So, these airlines fight firmly to get the best high traffic time slots, frequently
travelled routes, etc. Even the premium airline players in India like Vistara and
Air India have to fight with low-cost operators for competitive pricing.
So, this is how, by using Porter’s five models, you can analyze any industry.
Chapter 15: What’s the Business Capable
of?
I am sure you would have noticed that if a company makes good money, soon it
gets surrounded by plenty of competitors. Eventually, the profit margin of the
company suffers as the profits get divided amongst all competitors. But, there
are certain companies like Apple, Britannia, Zydus Wellness, etc. which are still
going strong despite too much competition. So, how do these companies
manage to stay strong? It is because of strong competitive advantage.
Business analysis helps to identify if there is any competitive advantage that a
company has over its peers. The differentiating factors could be patents, brands,
location and cost advantages, etc. These traits provide a company with a strong
shield to compete with others. In financial terminology, the competitive
advantage is often referred to as an economic moat.
Economic Moat: The ‘Differentiator’
In simple words, the moat is a competitive advantage with which a company runs
its business successfully.
In the words of legendary value investor Warren Buffett, ‘An economic moat
is the company’s ability to maintain a competitive advantage over its
competitors.’
An economic moat refers to a unique service or product that helps the company to
create a strong brand value for long. As soon as a company launches a new idea in
the market, many competitors increase because of high margins. This is where
economic moats come in the picture and provide tremendous competitive
advantage to such businesses which are faced by fierce competition.
How Does Knowing the Moat of a Company Help in Stock Investment?
Generally, for knowing how good a company is, you look at its past financial
track record. But, the previous track record of the company cannot give you
complete assurance of its future. Thus moats help you to understand how strongly
the company will be able to compete in the future. And, by understanding the
moat of a company, you can place your best bets on the most promising
companies.
How to Ensure that the Moat Is Sustainable?
Of course, the moats are susceptible to erosion with time. The only way to ensure
that it remains sustainable is that a company must follow a strong business model
which does not get affected in the longer run.
Different Types of Moats to Look for in a Company
There are various types of moats to look for in a company, which are:
1. Brands: You might have noticed that
you ask for Crocin instead of Paracetamol tablet when you visit a
medicine shop. Or, you often say Maggi instead of instant noodles when
you visit a Kirana shop. Such strong brands often become a part of our
routine life and get reflected in our vocabulary.
Here, as you can see, the product branding is so powerful that it
overshadows all the product variants available in the market. And this
is to such an extent that those variants are also bought in that product’s
name. So, companies manufacturing Crocin and Maggi have a strong
economic moat to sustain.
2 Regulatory Licences: Regulatory
licences also serve as an economic moat for several companies.
Example—credit rating agencies, NSE, BSE, have enjoyed a long-
standing monopoly in the market. Such companies have the edge over
others because they are licensed to perform certain activities which others
are not.
3. Patents and Copyrights: Patent refers to
an intellectual property right given to an individual for a limited period, to
retain exclusive rights for manufacturing, selling, or using an innovative
product or service. Patents are given to provide an exclusive opportunity to
the inventor to enjoy full commercial benefits for a limited period.
Example: Pharma industry thrives and survives on drug patents. A patent is one
of the reasons why certain medicines are so expensive, as they are protected
under the patent rights
4. Network Effect: A few companies do
exceptionally well because their products have an extensive network of
users, which is referred to as the network effect. In such cases, the value of
a product or service increases with the increase in the number of users.
For example, everyone uses MS office because everyone else is using it.
Another example is Facebook; the more is the number of users, the better is the
value of this social media platform. People prefer to stay on Facebook
because they know that their family and friends are available on it. Another
famous example is WhatsApp; you would want to use it over other chat
apps like WeChat because you would find all your friends there.
5. Switching Cost: Switching Cost serves
as an economic moat for those products where the time, cost and
inconvenience of changing to a competitor’s product is way too much, so,
customers prefer sticking to the same product. For example, people having
Airtel number would stick to it even if the services are not found to be
satisfactory. It is because switching would mean redistributing a new
number to all the contacts, which is cumbersome and time-consuming.
Thankfully, the mobile number portability has eradicated switching cost.
Another example is your bank account. It is difficult to switch your salary or
savings account to different banks as all services linked to your account
gets disrupted and you have to make a lot of effort to re-align them again to
your new account.
On the contrary, if you have a loyalty card of Big Bazaar and you learn that D-
mart has become cheaper, then you would immediately switch to D-mart. It
is so because there are no ties of any sort as a customer.
6. Low Cost: Low cost acts as an economic
moat when the manufacturing cost of the product is small. For example,
many cement industries establish their plants near lime resources to
minimize their cost of sourcing the raw material and the cost of distribution
of the finished product. So, with cement companies, what matters is the
availability of quality products at lower prices. Of course, product
differentiation is minimum in such cases.
Some other examples of this category of products are oil, power, and iron.
7. Vast Distribution Network: Vast
distribution network serves as an economic moat when the extensive
network helps you to replenish your stock instantly, to ensure that the
product is always available on the shelf.
Example: Ravi resided in a small town called Saharanpur. He wanted to buy a car.
Ravi was quite excited about the launch of MG Hector and wanted to
purchase one. But, since there wasn’t any MG dealership in his town, he
had to settle for a Suzuki Vitara Brezza.
Many small companies with remarkable products die out eventually as their
products never reach the end-users on time. It shows that they are left
behind by the companies using vast distribution network as an economic
moat. On the contrary, companies like Pepsi, Coca-Cola, HUL, and P&G,
are dominating the market due to their strong distribution network.
Thus it is crucial to analyze a business completely before investing in it. As an
investor, you must not rely on the short-term profits of a company but must
look at its long-term viability.
Customer Stickiness
Everyone enjoys going out on dinner outings with family or friends, but do you
visit the same restaurant every week? Of course not, because we look forward to
having a new change in every outing. So, the hunt is always for new places to
visit every weekend.
Now think about these products:
● Tata Salt
● Amul Butter
● Nescafe
● Crocin
Can you recollect the last time you used these products? And, since when are
we using these products? Why don’t we try any other paracetamol tablet apart
from Crocin or Calpol (which by the way is manufactured by the same
company)? Why don’t we buy any salt other than Tata Salt?
The reason is simple—these products are habit-based; they derive their value
from consistency and not a novelty. Products that are valued for their
consistency such as Coke, Nescafe, Lays, Colgate, etc. are far more successful
bets than products that rely on providing a unique experience or the novelty
factor. For example, clothes represent a category in which fashion changes
quickly as everyone wants to look different. Hence, these companies incur huge
R&D costs to bring in the latest fashion trends. In their quest to satiate the
fashion longings of their target customers, the garment companies end up
building a huge dead stock as well.
Therefore we see this huge competition and dozens of companies struggling in
denim, shirts, and trousers segment. No one is a clear winner; no one is making
huge money. Inversely, you don’t look for fashion or innovation in innerwear;
the essential factor is the comfort and experience with the brand. Therefore,
jockey suits you perfectly and sells like hotcakes. And, with this you’ve learnt
the first rule for identifying customer stickiness that is:
Rule 1. Look for companies with products that sell because of customer
habits and consistency
Now, have a look at the following questions:
Would you buy Gold from a jeweller who is not reliable? NO
Would you buy a T-shirt from a shop owner who you don’t know? Maybe Yes
Why was the answer different for two questions? Two reasons -
1) Value or Price of the product
2) Importance of the Product
If the product you are buying is cheap and the inferior quality of the product
won’t cause any harm, then you won’t be fussy about the product quality. But,
if the product is costly, you will think twice before experimenting with a new
brand or seller.
Remember that every time the product doesn’t have to be costly. You have to be
careful before buying it. After all, a paracetamol tablet costs less than Re 1. We
are very careful about its quality and brand because its inferior quality might
cause huge harm to you.
This is also the reason why car companies are struggling to snatch market share
from Maruti. Maruti is a trusted brand; no one wants to experiment with their
money by buying a car from a company other than Maruti. Since we incur a
huge cost in buying a car, we tend to play safe and stick to the brand that’s tried
and tested. And, this calls for rule no. 2, which is:
Rule 2. Look for Brands that sell because of their perceived or actual
superior quality and trust
Besides this, what else should you look for?
Look for products/services that have a large user base and high switching costs.
For example, HDFC bank has a vast user base. The bank has an intense
relationship with its clients because of up-selling and cross-selling of products.
A typical HDFC bank customer will have the following relationships with the
bank:
• Savings Account (own and family)
• Current Account (if he is a business owner)
• Credit card
• Bank Locker
• Life insurance
• Mutual funds
• Home/car loan
Imagine a customer who has availed so many products/services of HDFC bank.
Do you think he will switch because some other bank down the block is offering
1% higher interest? He will think of all the complexities and paperwork
involved and will most likely choose to stick to HDFC.
So, we can be sure that HDFC bank will show stable earnings for the
foreseeable future, making companies like these an excellent option to invest in.
So, this helps us in formulating the rule no. 3, which is:
.
Rule 3 Look for companies with a large customer base along with high
switching costs.
In a nutshell, one must look for companies which have -
1. Habit-forming products/services
2. Valued because of the consistent consumer experience they provide
3. Enjoy huge goodwill/trust
4. Companies have large and “sticky” consumer base.
Basically, the three rules teach us to hunt for those companies that have an
advantage of customer stickiness around them. If customers keep returning to
buy the products/services of the company, it ensures regular earnings of the
company, which assures your growth as an investor.
Forecasting Growth
Forecasting the growth of a company is a regular practice used by investors. In
the long run, the price of shares rises roughly in tandem with the increase in
profits.
Here is what an average stock market investor tries to predict regularly:
• Whether the market will rise or fall tomorrow?
• Whether company ABC’s share price will rise tomorrow?
• Whether Interest rates will rise?
• Whether inflation will fall? Etc.
We need to understand that trying to answer such questions are meaningless,
and they don’t help in better stock picking at all. Newspapers often sell such
information as financial noise that keeps us hooked. And, in the words of Peter
Bernstein, ‘Forecasts create the mirage that the future is knowable.’
“We have two classes of forecasters: Those who don’t know — and those who
don’t know they don’t know.” — Economist John Kenneth Galbraith
Forecasting is not just seen in stocks. You see those television experts trying to
predict the quarterly earnings of every stock on Earth. Experts try to forecast the
future of everything—GDP, weather, or even the Third World War. But have
you wondered why people are interested in predicting everything around?
Forecasting if turns true increases the smartness quotient of the forecaster; it is a
skill that gives them an immense fan following. So, people predict the future to
gain name and fame.
I see analysts trying to predict the next five years of estimated earnings of
hundreds of companies. What’s worse, they seem to precisely know how much
Company X will earn after five years. We can still relate if they give a range of
expected earnings, but then a range won’t make them look smart, so that they
will provide you with an exact figure up to multiple decimal points.
Example - A typical research report will tell you that Company X earned Rs
100 crores in 2017 and its expected earnings in the year 2022 will be 137.55
crores! This is how sure these research analysts are about the earnings five years
down the line. Now, this means that these guys are a bunch of geniuses, doesn’t
it?
Let’s compare this to what Warren Buffett has to say on forecasting stock
prices. He claims that he doesn’t even know what his own company will earn
the next month, so forget about predicting figures five years hence. He is the
greatest investor on Earth, confessing that earnings are unpredictable, even if
it’s his own company. But these so-called analysts will confidently predict the
next 100 years' earnings if they are paid to do that. Now, you are smart enough
to understand whether you should rely on predictions or not.
In the stock market, not all predictions are bad. But the important thing is to
differentiate the predictable vs. the unpredictable.
Here are some examples showing what is predictable and what is not:
1. Will we develop a time machine in the next 50 years? – “Unpredictable”
2. Will we need food and water to survive after 20 years? – “Predictable”
3. Will we start a civilization on Mars? - “Unpredictable”
4. Will people travel more by Air in the next 5 years? – “Predictable”
So, the first step is to segregate the predictable from the unpredictable. The
second step is to segregate between the “hard to predict” and “easy to predict”
questions. Here is an example:
1. Will people travel more by air in the next 10 years?
• Predictable – YES
2. Will India invest in constructing more airports?
• Yes – Easy to Predict
3. How many new airports will come up in the next 10 years?
• Hard to predict
Learning: Invest Based on “EASY TO PREDICT QUESTIONS.”
You must invest in stocks based on answers to questions that are easy to predict.
Easy to predict things do not require a precise forecast, as the more specific
your assumption is, the higher the risk of it going wrong.
For example, if I ask you, ‘Would you Invest in Zydus Wellness?’
Your answer must depend on the following questions:
1. Do you think people will become more diet-conscious?
2. Do you think Sugar Free Brand has a huge brand recall?
If the answer to the above two questions is yes, one could further analyze Zydus
as an investment option. So the right investment strategy requires you to make
generalized, and not specific assumptions.
Now, let’s take another example. ‘Would you invest in a company that makes
medicines for blood cancer patients?’ Well, let’s figure out how to answer this:
1. Do you think the occurrence of blood cancer will rise?
2. Do you think there will not be any new cure for blood cancer?
3. Do you think this company will remain a competitive blood cancer
drug manufacturer?
As you can see, the answers to these questions are much harder to forecast.
Such investing decisions, based on hard to predict responses, should be avoided.
Chapter 16: Management Analysis
For any company to succeed, it is essential to have the right set of top officials
to formulate the right strategies for the business. The top management of the
company manages the entire business operations.
They are required to take the crucial decisions of the company, like funds
diversification, product differentiation, business expansion, etc. The CEOs are
the key drivers behind charting a business’s course to success.
The example of Apple Incorporation can best narrate the importance of
management of the company. Steve Jobs had worked with Apple for some time;
then, he quit Apple and re-joined it after some years. Here is how his presence
and absence impacted the company.
From the above graph, it is clear that Apple performed its best when Steve Jobs
was running it, and the company clearly struggled in his absence.
In India Ratan Tata, Aditya Puri, Uday Kotak, Azim Premji, Adi Godrej, etc.
have been the key people in letting businesses reach the pinnacle of success! So
this is the power of efficient management!
The step-by-step guide to help you evaluate the management of any
company:
1. Company policies
Strong management is always the backbone of the company. It is not that the
employees are not necessary; of course, they are equally important, but it is the
management that steers the business and ensures that it sails through a safe ride.
The first and foremost thing to look for is the company’s policies for
shareholders and its employees. This is to check how strong the management of
a company is. Here is the checklist:
● Any company that talks only good about its policies, profits and
current happenings raises suspicion and calls for an alert. None of
the businesses were, are or will be run perfectly at all times.
● Every business will go through its phases of growth, maturity, and
decline, and hence, the investors must be informed about the
challenges and the repercussions of the same openly.
2. The vision and mission of the company
The vision and the mission of the company define the long-term and short-term
goals of the company, respectively. The top officials of the company make the
vision and the mission of the company.
So you must consider the following points while gauging a company for
investment:
● Is the mission of the company in line with its long-term vision?
● What are the steps taken by the top management to support the vision of
the company?
● Are there any programmes or events done to promote the vision of the
organization?
3. How does management allocate the excess funds?
Running a business well and earning profits out of it is just one part of the story.
But, how do you use the earned benefits to grow the business further is what
decides the longevity or the survival of the business.
The excess funds of a business are represented by Free Cash Flow (FCF), which
represents the actual cash inflow of the company after incurring all operating as
well as capital expenditures.
Here, are some of the ways how management reinvests its Free Cash Flow
(FCF):
• The management reinvests the free cash flow back in the business to
develop the business further.
• It looks out at paying good dividends to shareholders.
• It acquires new companies.
• It buys back the stocks of its own company.
All these practices act in favour of the company and bring up its business value
in the longer run.
4. Do you know that allocating funds wisely is a crucial parameter for a
business’s success?
Capital allocation is a big responsibility which must be taken up by a top official
of a company to get the best results. The performance of each CEO varies and
depends on his competencies and capabilities. The best way to allow any CEO to
perform his best is to segregate operational and capital allocation job roles.
Two live examples of this are Warren Buffet of Berkshire Hathaway and Ajay
Piramal of Piramal Enterprises. These two entrepreneurs only take care of the
capital allocation of the business, which is why they have been able to take their
businesses to new heights by making smart investment choices.
Another example is of Henry Singleton, who has been much applauded for his
excellent investment decisions in the past and has been ranked as the best
investor by Warren Buffet. So if a company has somebody solely responsible for
allocating capital, then, it indicates a good business practice.
5. How does the company compensate the top management?
This point has been discussed in detail in the chapter ‘A Closer look at the
Balance Sheet’
6. Watch out! If you see top officials are announcing stock prices every
quarter!
It is great for an investor to hear the stock price valuation right from the horse’s
mouth. If the top management often takes the lead in predicting the quarterly
stock valuation, then, it indicates that the management is paying way too much
heed to the short-term goals.
This often misleads serious investors, who keep themselves at bay from short-
term price fluctuations of the stocks. And, because management itself is
announcing the stock prices, it shows that the management believes a lot in
short-term price fluctuations of the stocks.
You must avoid such companies, as their vision gets way too narrow to survive
in the longer run.
7. Is the company reasonably spending all the hard-earned money?
When you hear too many swanky offices of a company coming up in different
parts of the cities, then, it must raise your eyebrows.
Of course, providing employee comfort and benefits in terms of a good work
environment is essential, but sometimes companies lose out on the bigger
picture, by investing in just one aspect of business development. The state-of-
the-art-offices must be developed only after investing in key business
development activities to thrive in the business.
8. Does the company share the bad news openly?
You would find companies talking about good events happening in the company.
But very seldom you will come across companies who will be equally eager and
open to sharing the bad news as well.
An example to substantiate this point is as follows. Suppose the sales of the
company have grown from 10 crores to 12 crores and the net profit has gone
down from 10 crores to 8 crores.
Now, how do you think this company must report these figures?
The company must state that the sales grew by 2 crores, which is 20% of the
growth rate, but the net profit has declined by 2 crores.
This is how a company must report the real picture to its shareholders in the
newsletters or on the website, to help them understand where the business is
currently. But what you see most companies reporting is:
Sales growth by 20%, net profit is at Rs. 8 Crores.
This very subtly indicates the intent of the top management. Smart investors
would understand these cues and will know the real face of the management of
this company.
9. Is management a trendsetter or a trend follower?
When your company is a part of any billion-dollar industry, then it is quite
natural to follow the competitors around, but if management follows a trend only
to prove itself better of the lot, then, an investor needs to be watchful.
Often, it is seen that when an X company acquires another competitor, it
immediately becomes news, and the news portrays company X as a powerful
proponent of the industry. This builds in a lot of insecurities amongst other
competitors who want to prove their worth as well. And hence, they too get into
an acquisition without analyzing their moves.
No wonder, such hasty moves make waste!
Some interesting examples from the past:
1. Tata Steel acquiring Corus was big news and an equally big disaster as well!
2. Hindalco acquiring Novelis was, again, a huge mistake.
One of the smart ways to check if the acquisition is made on a real basis or only
to match up the competitors is, by seeing if the top officials of the company are
bragging about such M&As or not. Usually, the CEOs brag about such
acquisitions when they want to satiate their ego.
10 . Tenure of association of top management with the company:
If you have watched somebody for an extended period, then it becomes easy to
predict his performance in the future as well. On the contrary, it gets difficult to
judge somebody who has been around in the public eye only recently, as his
performance has not been witnessed as yet.
So, the moral of the story is to look for a company whose top management has
been around for at least a decade to prove their worth. In such cases, the
consistent positive performances of senior officials reassure their interest and
capabilities, which are the ultimate key to success.
11. Is the company a flat organisation or does it follow the bureaucratic
culture?
Though bureaucracy is highly discouraged, many public sector undertakings and
some big corporations are bureaucratic in approach.
Bureaucracy involves many levels or layers of management and follows the top-
down control approach. Bureaucratic organizations are rigid, as they lack
creativity and flexibility of operating in an organization. Such practices indicate
poor management policies for the organisation.
Examples: State Bank of India (SBI) is highly bureaucratic and invites red-
tapism resulting in delayed work. This made it lose many opportunities that
came its way. Though SBI is growing at a fast pace, it would have already
become much bigger, only if it had avoided the bureaucratic approach.
HDFC, on the other hand, is a flat banking organization with much quicker
responses due to no bureaucracy. Hence, it could touch the new heights of
success in no time.
12. Clear Communication
Clear and straightforward communication must be visible in the annual reports
of the company. The annual reports of the company must show that the
management takes responsibility for all its actions. The intent of the
management can also be gauged by the following communications:
Newsletters given to shareholders: You must read all the past newsletters that
were shared by the company with its shareholders. These newsletters disclose
critical information like:
a. What is the aim of running the business?
b. What is the current financial health of the company?
c. What led to the critical decisions in the recent past?
d. What are the business prospects shortly?
e. What are the challenges faced by the company in meeting its targets and how
does the management intend to resolve them?
Conference call letters: Often, conferences discuss the recent issues in a long-
held meeting, which include the presence of all the shareholders of the company.
Such, discussions are noted as the minutes of the meeting to keep as a record for
future references.
You must take a look at all past conference transcripts, which will give you a
reasonably good idea about how openly the company has been talking about its
challenges. And, you may come across statements made by the management
like, ‘We will not be able to disclose all the information as we do not let our
competitors know about our strategies in the interest of the business.’ Such
statements signal red alert as a company must look at outperforming its
competitors by all means rather than focussing on hiding information from its
investors.
13. Is the CEO more media-friendly?
If you find the topmost official of the company throwing a lot of weight on
media channels, then, he is somebody who gets carried away by the name and
fame of the business. Such people are often flamboyant, carry a lot of charisma,
have aggressive salesmanship and boast a lot about their accomplishments.
Watch out for such CEOs and stay away from such companies who employ
these overpriced officials to run the show!
Often, in the quest of becoming the ‘Show-stopper’, such people lose out the
battle terribly! One live example that can be quoted here is of Mr. Anil Ambani.
14. How is the top management hired?
This is yet another thought-provoking question when it comes to analyzing the
managing machinery of a company. In some companies, the family members are
by default, made the top management of the company, whereas in many others
the right people are placed in the right positions.
Though, the prior situation is favourable as the owners will act in the company’s
best interest, yet, the family members must not hold all top positions. Moreover,
it is essential to see if the family members are the right fit for strategic decision-
making, as they will be the key drivers of the business.
Though there is nothing right or wrong here, and the idea to learn about the
hiring policies is only to see how fair the company is in its dealings, it would be
right to say that there must be a healthy mix of insiders and outsiders to have
interest and innovation work together in the company’s best interest.
15. Assurance that the management is trustworthy
Is the management trustworthy, can be found out by figuring out the following
answers:
• Does the management follow ethical practices like integrity?
• Does the management openly disclose the strengths and weaknesses of the
company?
• Does the management reinvest the profits or raise the equity holders’ dividends
or hoard the money?
• Has the company made any acquisitions in the past and had they been paid off?
• Has the top management been reinvesting in its stocks?
• Does the management hold a good percentage of shares in its name? It shows the
trust the management has in its own company as it is ready to bear hefty
profits and losses equally.
Chapter 17: A Closer Look at the Annual
Report
Though, there is not much of statistical analysis needed to analyze the stocks,
yet, here is an overview of a few ratios to help you understand the financial
health of the company.
How to Analyze a Company ‘Qualitatively’?
When you have to buy a car, you go around researching the market for the best
brand and model for yourself. You check out different brands to compare their
mileage, power, durability, performance, etc. Post all this necessary
groundwork, you decide the best one to buy.
Similarly, before investing in any company, you have to understand its annual
report, which indicates the true financial health of the company.
So, let’s get started with the real basics of analysing the financial health of a
company.
What is an Annual Report?
An annual report of a company is the snapshot of its business activities of the
preceding year. At the end of every financial year, every company publishes its
annual report on its website.
The annual report is sent to the shareholders of the company every year.
Here are the qualitative and quantitative parameters to look out for while
reading an annual report.
1. Design and tone of the report
The design and tone of the annual report must be easy to understand for lay
investors. The purpose of publishing an annual report is to share and disclose
the key information to the shareholders and other prospective investors.
However, there are a few companies that treat the annual report as a part of the
company’s PR to woo the existing and potential shareholders and attract
investment in the company.
Do you know that some companies act smart by twisting the tone and design of
the report? They use excessive bright colours and pictures to make it look
attractive, and in the process, mislead the readers by overshadowing important
information.
Here are the names of two such companies whose annual report looks more like
a marketing brochure
I. Tree House
II. Temptation Foods
Temptation Foods has already wrapped up its business, and Tree House is in a
stage of liquidation. Both these companies made lengthy annual reports to fill
pages bragging about themselves. They believed that their fancy reports with
bright colours and impressive images would hide the problems faced by the
companies. But, if it was true, then these ventures would still have existed.
Fig: The snapshot of the annual report of ‘Tree House.’
Here is an example of a company, Goodyear India, which is a reputed brand
name and gives a truly straightforward annual report. Goodyear India puts just
three to four colourful pages at the beginning, which share the details of the
company’s top management, and soon after it gets straight to the subject.
Fig: Snapshot of the annual report of ‘Good Year’
2. Highlighted graphs and diagrams
As an investor, when you sit down to read the annual report of a company, you
must surely look at the increase in EPS (Earnings per Share).
Some companies fill pages with graphs containing sales revenue, earnings, etc.,
but they will hardly mention the EPS. But, what good is the company, if it
cannot tell its current shareholders or potential shareholders about their earnings
per share?
3. Management discussion and analysis
Under this section, you would get the following insights:
• How does management perceive the present position of the company?
• What is the management’s feel about the future of the company?
• What are the business activities that are planned for the future?
• The future growth and strategies of the company are discussed in detail.
Here, the company must attempt to resolve the investor’s dilemma and the risk
associated with investing in the company.
But, if after reading through this section, you feel that you did not understand
the information shared, then, you can be sure that management intended it that
way. At times, it is seen that the reports are loaded with buzzwords such as
“synergy,” “strategic,” etc. only to fill up space.
4. Management Remuneration
Compensation acts as an excellent means of motivation for one and all,
including the CEO. The CEO is undoubtedly the highest earner in the
organization, which is, of course, well deserved! If the CEO is compensated in
proportion to earned profits, his interest is always maintained in the company.
And, most importantly, you must try to understand how the top management of
the company is compensated if the business is not doing well.
For example, if a CEO owns stock worth Rs. 5 Crores and has an annual salary
package of Rs. 1 Crore, then he strives hard to ensure the company grows.
Moreover, if the same CEO owns Rs. 5 Crores of shares and is paid an annual
salary package of Rs. 8 Crores, then his interest may be restricted to performing
within the boundaries defined by the job, rather than going the extra mile to
grow the company. Thus, the interest of the CEO towards the company will be
higher in the prior case than in the latter one.
Hence, the management of a company is considered best when it continually
increases its ownership in the company. You would find these details on the BSE
website easily to see how much each management has invested in their own
companies.
Now, let us look at another situation where the company is owned and managed
by a family. In such cases, the investor must check the quantum of salary and
other forms of compensation that the management extracts from the company.
Some promoters extract up to 10% of the profits of the company in the form of
salaries (10% is the ceiling as per Companies Act, 2013). Management that
rewards itself excessively doesn’t care about its shareholders.
Do you think it would be wise to invest in such companies? Of course not!
Increase in management’s remuneration should always be in proportion to the
company’s profits. If the performance of the company is deteriorating, but the
management’s compensation is increasing, it is a red flag indicating that such
companies must be avoided.
So, in case the promoters are increasing their shareholding, it can be considered
as a positive sign. It also signifies that they are optimistic about the company’s
growth and strategies.
On the other hand, a decrease in promoters’ shareholding can be taken as a
negative sign, and it may express their loss of faith in the company. Think about
it, would you sell your stake in the business that you have nurtured carefully if
you see a huge potential of growth in it in the future? But again, sometimes,
promoters’ shareholding decreases for some other reasons like they are planning
for a new venture or a new plant, etc.
However, if the promoters’ shares are continuously decreasing without any
clear reasons, then you might need to investigate further and take cautionary
actions.
For example, during the Satyam scandal, Ramalinga Raju’s holdings were
continuously decreasing. He sold over 4.4 crores shares in 2001 to 2008 period.
Those who were following the shareholding pattern of the promoters might
have seen these signs indicating danger for the investors.
5. Warrants
A warrant is an alternative given to the management to buy the shares of the
company, at a price lower than the market price. So as an investor, your aim
should be to check if there is an excessive number of warrants issued to the
management. This is so because excessive warrants can dilute the EPS for
equity shareholders.
6. Related party transaction
It refers to the transaction between the company and any entity/individual who
is directly related to the directors/management. Though these transactions are
legal, yet, there are chances that it may affect the shareholder’s interest. For
example – XYZ Ltd, and ABC Pvt. Ltd. are two companies. Asha is the CEO of
XYZ Ltd, and her husband Mr. Abhay holds a 40% stake in ABC Pvt. Ltd.
Suppose ABC Ltd is in a bad financial position and no bank is giving loans to it,
but XYZ Ltd decides to take a credit on its name, and then pass it on to ABC
Ltd, then it will be called related party transaction. Such transactions will hurt
the shareholder’s profits.
Chapter 18: Analysing Financial
Statements
A company’s annual report comprises the following three basic
components that are referred to as financial statements:
Let us see each of these in detail:
1. Balance Sheet: In simple words, a balance sheet represents the
company’s financial position. It represents the total assets owned by the
company and also discloses how these assets are financed—through debt
or equity.
The balance sheet of a company is based on a fundamental
accounting equation, which is:
CAPITAL = ASSETS -
LIABILITIES
“Owner’s funds” “possessions”
“obligations.”
1. Assets
Assets are any resource which is owned by the company and is capable
of generating future cash flows. For example—cash, plant and
machinery, furniture, etc.
Assets can be classified depending upon the period of holding, as
follows:
a) Current assets - Current assets are held for less than one year and
hence have higher liquidity. For example, cash and cash equivalents,
stock, office supplies, short-term deposits.
b) Non-current assets (Fixed Assets) - These assets are held by the
company for more than one year and cannot be easily converted into
cash. For example, land, building, furniture, etc.
2. Liabilities - Liabilities are monetary obligations of the entity, which
are required to be paid off. Some liabilities are generated in the day-to-
day course of business while some can be loans taken for a longer
duration. Depending upon the payment period, liabilities can be
classified as:
a) Current liabilities - These obligations have to be settled within a
year. For example, payments to creditors, interest payable, short-term
loans, etc.
b) Non-current liabilities - These obligations have to be settled within a
year or more. They are important to determine long-term solvency of
the company. Non-current liabilities are normally loans taken by the
company for projects or purchase of an asset, etc.
The accounting equation goes as—
CAPITAL = ASSETS - LIABILITIES
“Value to owner” “have” “owe.”
This equation always satisfies.
So, when we purchase machinery (asset is increased) and cash reduces
(an asset reduces). Thus, the asset remains unchanged, and hence, the
equation remains satisfied. This remains true for all transactions.
2. Statement of profit and loss
Profit and loss statement reflects the most important perspective of a
company— ‘its profitability.’ It is important to keep track of all the
expenses incurred and all the revenues generated in the year. It reflects
the three most important elements—
● Revenue generated during the year
● Expenses incurred during the year
● Net profit of the company
Revenue generated during the year - Every profit and loss statement
starts with ‘revenue from operations.’ Revenue is different from profit.
Revenue is the number of sales generated during the year.
If you sold goods worth Rs 100 and relevant costs are Rs 80, the net
amount earned= 100-80= Rs 20.
In this case, revenue is Rs 100, and profit is Rs 20. So, we can say that
the gross amount received for any transaction relating to the company’s
core business activity is called Revenue from operations. ‘Revenue’ and
‘sales’ means the same thing, and it should not be confused with profits.
Expenses - Expenses are incurred by the company for generating
revenues. These can be for the purchase of raw materials, employee
benefits, interest costs, etc. One major expense for the company is
depreciation, amortization, and impairment of an asset.
Depreciation, amortization, and impairment –
Whenever a company buys any fixed assets, its benefit is expected to be
enjoyed for more than one year. So, it is capitalized in the books.
Capitalized means it is not treated as an expense and charged in P/L
account but is booked in the balance sheet as assets, and year by year, the
value of assets is reduced, and a little part is booked as an expense in the
name of depreciation of an asset.
For example, if a company has purchased a machine for Rs 10,000, and it
is expected to provide benefits for 10 years, every year only Rs 1000 is
charged in profit and loss account as depreciation to account for the wear
and tear of the machine.
Similarly, if any intangible asset (trademark, copyright, goodwill) is
purchased by the company, it is ‘amortized’ every year.
And, in case substantial damage has occurred to the machine during the
year, the expense is booked as impairment of assets.
Net profit - Net profit is the amount left with the company after all the
expenses have been incurred. Net profit belongs to the shareholders of the
company.
3. Cash flow statements
Cash flow statements are another important part of financial statements
that reflect liquidity. The liquidity of the company is how easily the
company can convert its assets into cash to meet its short-term or current
liabilities. So, even though a company owns many assets, a company can
face liquidity issues if such assets cannot readily be converted into cash.
Cash flow statement tracks the flow of cash (inflow as well as outflow)
from various sources throughout the year. A cash flow statement shows
cash at the beginning of the year and additions and reductions of cash
during the year and the final balance at the end of the year.
All these three parts of financial statements (Profit & Loss Statement,
Cash Flow Statement, and Balance Sheet) are important for analysing the
true position of the company.
There may be a possibility that the company has a very attractive profit
and loss statement during the year, but while going through the balance
sheet, we find that the company is generating profits by selling off its
fixed assets.
At other times, the profit and loss statement can also show loss during the
year, but while going through the balance sheet, we realize that the
company has created value for the shareholders by starting new
businesses.
At times, it is also possible that balance sheets and profit and loss
statement represent huge turnover and high profits, but by looking into
cash flow statements, we realize that the company is not able to recover
money from its customers. And, thus is unable to pay back its loans on
time.
Thus, we use various ratios, which takes elements from all three parts of
financial statements and express a relationship between them. This brings
in a lot of clarity in understanding the real standing of a company.
In this chapter, we will study various types of ratios, along with their
computation and interpretation. Going by the convention, we generally
compare ratios of various companies of the same industry or ratios of the
current financial findings of the company with its records, to interpret the
performance of the company.
Here, I would like to bring your attention to the fact that the right
interpretation of ratios is far more important than being able to compute
them. Of course, without computing them correctly, you will never be
able to deduce the right findings. Nevertheless, the focus must be more on
learning to interpret them correctly, which has been made easy in the
following chapters.
As it is, the ratios often differ from analyst to analyst, so, we will study
some very widely used ratios to make things easy. Depending upon the
aspects measured by them, these ratios can be categorised as:
Each ratio needs to be properly interpreted because that in turn will provide you
with clarity regarding how to use that particular ratio in understanding the
performance of a company.
Let’s understand the important ratios through a story.
Kumar & his Business Idea:
Kumar was a fresh MBA graduate and wanted to set up a large-scale
business in life. His father was an officer in the Indian army who had
just retired. Kumar had a business idea and wanted to incorporate his
startup. Initial investment was not an issue because his father had
received a decent post-retirement package and better, he was open to
help his son pursue his dreams.
Inception of HeadLabs : Courtesy- Kumar’s Dad
Headlabs manufactures wireless headphones of medium range. So,
Headlabs headphones are not as costly as Bose and not as cheap as
substandard Chinese headphones. They are positioned right in the
middle.
First Year of Business:
Kumar had an exciting first year of business. Following are the results that he
got in April 2015.
Amount (in millions)
Revenue from sales 8.00
Other Income (commissions, dividends 4.50
etc.)
Total Income 12.50
Less: - Expenses
Cost of raw materials (2.50)
Rent (1.00)
Administrative Expenses (2.50)
Depreciation (wear & tear) (1.00)
Interest (0.5)
Other expenses (Non-operating) (0.5)
Profit Before tax 4.5
Less :- tax @ 30% 1.35
Net Profit 3.15
Balance Sheet (In Millions)
Amount
Share Capital (Money given by Kumar’s 10.00
Dad)
Reserve and Surplus 3.15
Long term borrowing (Business Loan) 4.30
Short term borrowing (Money borrowed 2.50
from friends for short term)
Current Liabilities 3.05
Total Liabilities 23.00
Fixed Asset 7.00
Capital work in progress 5.50
Investment 1.00
Cash 6.50
Inventory 1.00
Other Current Assets 2.00
Total Assets 23.00
Now, suppose Kumar is your friend. He shows you this data and
proposes a partnership for his company. Will you invest in the
venture?
What factors will you consider to make your decision?
Your Decision will Reveal Your Knowledge:
If you decided to invest straightaway, you were wrong! And, if you
rejected the proposal outright, you were still wrong! How is this
possible? Well, the data is not sufficient to make an investment
decision.
Now, you’ll learn how to make an investment decision based on
financial data.
Judging Profitability:
Above you would have seen a figure denoting profitability.
Figures in Millions
Profit Before tax 4.5
Less :- tax @ 30% 1.35
Net Profit 3.15
Now, you get an option of investing with Bass-X, a competitor of
Kumar’s company that has reported a Net Profit of 5 Million. Now
which is a better option?
Did you choose one? Was it Bass-X?
You’re not alone who did this. Most of the investors just look at the
net profit and make a decision. But, that’s not the right way of doing
it. Net profit for a company is an absolute figure. This tells literally
nothing! Even when you compare this number to another company’s
number, you won’t get meaningful information.
You must be wondering, then how should we judge the profitability?
That’s where profitability ratios come into play.
Gross Profit Margin:
This is a metric to evaluate the manufacturing efficiency of a
company.
Let’s go back to our example.
Net sales for HeadLabs in 2015 was Rs. 8 million and total expenses
related to manufacturing were Rs. 2.5 million. So, the Gross Profit of
HeadLabs in 2015 was Rs. 5.5 million.
Gross profit is the difference of net sales and all manufacturing
expenses.
Please do not confuse between Gross Profit and Gross Profit
Margin.
Gross Profit Margin is the proportion of gross profit to net sales. In
the case of HeadLabs, the Gross Profit Margin is 68.75 %. Here’s
how we calculated it:
(5.50/8.00) x 100
Now, consider this:
Suppose, the average Gross Profit Margin in this industry ranges from
50 % to 60 %. Hence, HeadLabs has a competitive advantage over its
peers as indicated by its Gross Profit Margin. This means that
HeadLabs is able to manage its production cost better than its peers. It
may be due to better inventory management, higher bargaining power,
strong procurement policy etc.
Thumb Rule: Higher the gross profit margin, higher would be the
company’s efficiency to generate profits.
Operating Profit Margin:
Gross profit margin only shows manufacturing efficiency but there
are many other factors which play an important role in functioning of
the company. For example – HeadLabs would have spent on
advertising and promotions to increase its sales. But this hasn’t been
considered in the Gross Profit Margin.
Some of the factors excluded in Gross Profit Margin include:
Expenses related to sales and administration like office rent,
distribution expenses, promotional expenses, salaries of staffs etc.
Hence, Operating Profit Margin gives us the measure of profit
generated from business operations.
For HeadLabs, the Operating Profit Margin would be:
(1.00/8.00) x 100 = 12.5 %
Operating Profit = gross profit - operating expenses
5.50 – (1.00+2.50+1.00) = 1.00 (Million)
Note :-Non-operating items such as payment of interest, income from
dividend, profit or loss from sale of investment etc. are excluded in
the Operating Profit calculation.
Net Profit Margin:
Net Profit is the final amount which arrives after adjusting all kinds of
operating and non-operating items, and this entire profit amount
belongs to the equity shareholders of the company.
As we’ve already discussed, a single figure in a company’s report is
not enough to analyze the overall performance. So, to draw a
comparative study we need to calculate Net Profit Margin. Net Profit
Margin shows the proportion of net income to total sales. After
looking at the Net Profit Margin, one can make out what proportion of
revenues goes towards settling in operating and non-operating
expenses and what’s the percentage that is left over for either
distributing to shareholders or reinvest in the company.
Net Profit Margin for HeadLabs is 39.37%
If you’re thinking that this is quite impressive, here’s the complete
picture:
You see, Net Profit for HeadLabs includes other income of Rs. 6
millions, which is almost 75 % of the core revenue. There’s no
guarantee that HeadLabs would be able to generate this income in
future as well.
Investor ALERT! – If you see a substantial amount of other income
in the income statement of the company, then it’s a caveat for you.
You need to critically evaluate the nature of other income and then
take a decision.
This was all about the profit margins. Now, we need to see the
scenario from investor’s point of view.
HeadLabs Goes Public:
After completing a successful year of operations, in 2015 HeadLabs
went public. The shares were issued to public and got subscribed.
This resulted in HeadLabs raising Rs. 20 million from public thereby
increasing the share capital to Rs. 30 million.
2016 is a Fantastic Year for HeadLabs:
Profit and Loss Account
Amount (in millions)
Revenue from sales 14.00
Other Income (commissions, dividends 6.00
etc.)
Total Income 20.00
Less: - Expenses
Cost of raw materials (6.05)
Rent (1.00)
Administrative Expenses (3.00)
Depreciation (wear & tear) (1.00)
Interest (1.00)
Other expenses (Non-operating) (0.50)
Profit Before tax 7
Less :- tax @ 30% 2.1
Net Profit 4.9
Balance Sheet
Amount (in
Millions)
Share Capital (Money given by Kumar’s Dad 30.00
+ Money Received from IPO)
Reserve and Surplus 8.05
Long term borrowing (Business Loan) 5.00
Short term borrowing (Money borrowed 3.00
from friends for short term)
Current Liabilities 4.05
Total Liabilities 50.10
Fixed Asset 18.00
Capital work in progress 10.00
Investment 6.00
Cash 10.50
Inventory 2.00
Other Current Assets 3.60
Total Assets 50.10
The second year of operations brought a great opportunity for
HeadLabs. They received a bulk order from an international BPO
which rewarded them with an increase of profit by more than 50 %
over their last year’s profit i.e.
Total profit of Rs. 4. 9 million
Impressive, right? But, it’s not about the company’s gains. It’s about
what the shareholders got.
An investor puts in his money with a company in hope of a good
return.
If a company generates huge profits and also requires high amount of
capital investment, then, returns for the shareholders would not
increase. Like this, the company will not be able to maximize its
shareholders’ wealth.
So, the bigger financial picture of HeadLabs would look like:0
(All Figures in Millions)
Net Profit in 2015 = 3.15 (with capital requirement of 13.15)
Net Profit in 2016 = 4.9 (with capital requirement of 38.05)
So, Return on Equity (ROE) in 2015 = 23.95 %
& ROE in 2016 = 12.88 %
ROE is one of the most important ratios for the potential investors
because the measure indicates how efficient the company is in
generating returns on the investment done by its shareholders.
A high ROE indicates a company’s ability to generate higher returns
for its shareholders. If a company reinvests its earnings wisely and is
able to enhance productivity and profits, it can increase its ROE
thereby enhancing shareholders’ wealth.
Investors need to understand that the profitability and income levels vary
significantly across sectors, so this yardstick (ROE) cannot be used to compare
inter sector companies. Also, a short-term slide in profit may lead to a low
ROE.
So, evaluate 3-5 years’ ROE to spot companies with a track record of stable
profitability.
The major drawback of ROE is it only shows returns generated by
equity investment. But equity is not the only way by which a
company may raise funds. It can also take a loan. Isn’t it?
If a company takes a huge amount of borrowed money compared to
equity capital, then the ROE % will be high.
In capital-intensive industries such as iron & steel, automobile, real
estate etc., companies rely more on debt than equity. So, ROE will not
present the right picture in case of these companies.
In this case, ROCE (Return on Capital Employed) would show a more
reliable picture.
ROCE = EBIT (Earnings Before Interest & Tax) x 100 / (share capital
+ reserve and surplus + borrowings)
ROCE for HeadLabs = (5.9 x 100) /46.05 = 12.81 %
A company’s ROCE should always be greater than its cost of capital.
Otherwise, it’s likely to be bankrupt in near future. Imagine – if a
company pays an annual interest of Rs. 50 cr on its loan of Rs. 500 cr,
the cost of capital would be 10 %. Now, if the ROCE is less than 10
%, the company is not able to employ its capital efficiently. And, if
this situation continues, the company might face survival issues in
future.
ROIC:
Suppose you spot another company in the same industry, Bass-X
whose ROCE is 14 % with similar capital structure, do you think
that’s a better option?
Of course not!
The Balance Sheet of HeadLabs includes cash balance of Rs. 10.5
million which is not employed in the business operation. Had the cash
been used, HeadLabs would have probably had a higher ROCE.
Cash is an idle asset. So, to eliminate the effect caused by ‘Cash’
factor, ROIC (Return on Invested Capital) is used.
ROIC of HeadLabs = (5.9 x 100) / 35.55 = 16.59 %
ROIC of Bass-X = 14 % (since cash balance for Bass-X = 0)
Usually, a company with higher ROIC is better for an investor. But,
since when the unused cash has been there, is something to critically
analyse.
Investor ALERT! - For a company, if the cash balance has been
high for last 4-5 years and it is not being utilized, that’s not a good
sign. Had the company been planning for an acquisition, it’s
understandable but, idle cash kept for years in no use creates
dissatisfaction amongst the investors.
Activity or Efficiency Ratios:
Profitability ratios present a clear picture as to how much profits a
company is making in a particular period of time. But, will the
profitability sustain? This is equally important, and this is presented
by efficiency ratios also known as activity ratios.
In simple language efficiency is nothing but ability to enhance the
output with a given input. Similarly, efficiency ratios also tell us
whether a company would be able to enhance its profits if it has more
assets at its disposal.
Below is a diagram that explains business processes along with ratios
that are used to judge their efficiency.
1) Account Payable Turnover/ Creditors Turnover: -
Accounts payable is a short-term debt that a company owes to its
suppliers, vendors or other creditors. The payable turnover ratio is
used to see how efficiently a company pays its suppliers and short-
term debts. The payable turnover can also be referred in terms of time
period which is known as ‘Creditor Days’. It shows the average time
(in days) that a company takes to payits suppliers.
Generally, a longer period of credit (High Creditor Days) is
considered as an advantage because it represents a source of free
finance for the company.
Large corporates generally have better negotiating power with
suppliers and that is why they enjoy favorable credit terms which
helps them to maintain a high Credit Period.
2) Asset Turnover Ratio
Asset turnover ratio is used to determine how efficiently the company
is utilizing its asset to generate sales. The ratio compares sales with
average assets.
Generally, a low asset turnover ratio suggests idle capacity, poor
receivable management, bad acquisition or economic slowdown.
Companies with cyclical business models tend to have volatile Asset
Turnover Ratio. So, the ratio should be evaluated for several time
periods. Companies with low profit margins usually have high asset
turnover which helps them to maintain high ROE despite having low
profit margin. For example – Retail giants like Big Bazaar, D-Mart
etc. operate on quite thin profit margins, but their asset turnover is
very high due to volumes they sell and their frequency of selling. That
is why they are able to maintain decent ROE.
3) Inventory Turnover Ratio:-
An improper inventory management can directly affect the company’s
profitability. Inventory management is mainly about Cost and Risk.
Transportation charges, storage, opportunity cost and insurance cost
are examples of cost whereas obsolescence, shelf-life, understocking,
wear & tear, pilferage etc. are examples of risk.
Investor should examine the inventory turnover ratio in order to
determine the number of times a company has sold and replaced its
inventory in an year. A low inventory turnover ratio indicates poor
liquidity, overstocking and risk of obsolescence. But, this has to be
checked according to the industrial benchmarks.
4) Debtor / Receivable Turnover Ratio
There are very few businesses which operate fully on No Credit
policy. Though, favorable credit policy offers a competitive
advantage to the company, it also bears additional risk of bad debts.
So, prompt collection from debtors is an essential step for maintaining
healthy cash flows.
A high turnover ratio can be interpreted as management’s
conservative credit policy and effective collection method.
Investor Alert! - Debtor turnover and inventory turnover ratios are
also vital tools to find out accounting scandals. Many a times
companies inflate their sale volume either through channel stuffing or
through fictitious sale. So, any unusual increase in receivables or
inventory should be evaluated with sales trends. If it has a negative
correlation or there is a huge difference in proportionate changes, it
can be an indication of fraudulent financial reporting.
Solvency Ratios:
Debt can be the ‘Death’ of any company. Indian market has seen
plenty of examples like Jet Airways, Kingfisher, Reliance
Communications etc. These companies used to be everyone’s favorite
in the stock market at one point in time. Now, where are they, we all
know.
How likely will a company get bankrupt, is evident from solvency
ratios.
There are 2 components of solvency ratios:
1. Debt-equity ratio
2. Interest coverage ratio
The proportion of amount raised by a company through debt and
equity is shown by Debt-Equity Ratio. A debt-equity ratio of less than
one is always preferred. Because, a higher ratio indicates a higher
proportion of debt in the company’s capital structure.
Investor ALERT! - Debt is a fixed obligation. Defaulting invites
great trouble. Therefore, investors must watch out if the company’s
debt-equity ratio is quite high.
Fun fact – Debt is a cheaper source to raise funds as compared to
equity. Reason being, tax benefit can be claimed with interest paid on
debt while it cannot be claimed in case of paying dividends.
Debt is usually projected as a monster but it is not so. Depending on
the existing financial position of the company, the debt can be
beneficial as well. Consider a company with excellent financial
health. If it has a project at hand and doesn’t want to dilute its
shareholders’ wealth, it can well raise the money through debt.
What’s the optimum level of debt a company can have? This is
calculated with the help of Interest Coverage Ratio. Interest coverage
ratio measures the ease with which a company can pay its interest
liability on the outstanding debt. It is expressed as:
Interest coverage ratio = Earnings before interest and taxes
Interest expense
Higher the interest coverage ratio, better it is.
Liquidity Ratios:
Too much of long-term thinking is sometimes harmful because we’re
living in the present and being too much futuristic can take us far
from reality. For a company, just maintaining the solvency isn’t
enough. It has to take care of the liquidity as well.
Say, owning land worth Rs. 1 crore, won’t help the company to pay
off electricity bill of say, Rs 10,000. Thus, it becomes important for a
company to possess assets like cash, marketable securities, etc.,
(called current assets) to be able to pay off all its dues on time.
In terms of investing, several “liquidity ratios” are used to measure
the company’s liquidity. These ratios measure the ease with which a
company can pay its dues.
Further, these ratios should be compared with the industry average or
historical data as companies with different business models have to
maintain different levels of working capital.
Let’s have a look at the liquidity ratios for HeadLabs:
Current Ratio = 16.1/4.05 = 3.97%
Current ratio is the proportion of current assets to current liabilities.
Current ratio should be high but not too much. A high current ratio
shows that the company has enough current assets to pay of its current
liabilities on time. But, a very high current ratio shows that current
assets of the company are lying idle.
There’s a slight limitation to current ratio. There are certain current
assets which can’t be readily liquidated like- inventory and prepaid
expenses. So, to accurately judge the immediate liquidity of the
company, we use Quick Ratio.
Quick Ratio is the ease with which the company can pay its short-
term obligations without liquidating its fixed assets.
Quick Ratio of HeadLabs = 14.1/4.05 = 3.48
Investor ALERT! - If there’s a big gap between the current ratio and
quick ratio of the company, it means that a huge amount of money is
blocked in inventory.
In this case, the investor should compare the company’s data with its
competitors. Also, the investor should analyze the trend for last few
years.
Moral of the Story
The ratios discussed in the story are not predefined criteria for analysing a stock
perfectly because each ratio’s usage is subjective depending upon the company,
industry etc. As an investor, your criteria will differ based on the companies you
analyse just like a customer who doesn’t apply a single criterion to purchase
anything and everything.
Chapter 19: Valuation Analysis
A company’s market price does not always denote its fair value,
because the stock price is determined by market forces (demand
and supply). There are numerous external factors which may
temporarily affect the stock prices (like a favourable government
regulation), but the sudden optimism or pessimism is short-lived
and that is why fair value is considered. In the long run, stock
prices tend to align with the company’s fundamentals or what we
call Fair Value.
There are various methods to reach the fair value of a company.
The method you choose would depend upon the industry and the
business model that company is following. Below are some really
important methods for your reference.
1) Discounting cash flows:-
As the name signifies, the method estimates the profitability of an investment
by calculating its future income or cash flow and then discounting this income
with a reasonable rate of return called discount rate. The valuation analysis
focuses to determine the value of the company today, based on future cashflows
projection.
To understand it better we will take an example of real estate investment.
Suppose you are interested in buying a house to earn rental income out of it.
How much price would you be willing to pay?
First of all, let’s see what benefit you will get out of this –
üMonthly Rental Income
üCapital gain after selling the house
For example, you want to hold it for five years.
In these 5 years, suppose you expect to collect total rent of Rs. 3 lakhs (by Rs.
5000 per month) and you plan to sell it off for Rs. 20 lakhs after 5 years.
So, in this case, you would not pay more than the total rent you would earn in
these 5 years + expected selling price after five years. Similarly, paying the
amount equal to the sum of rental income and sale realization would not make
sense because, what would you gain if your total revenue is equal to total
expense. So, the fair value for this investment would be less than 23 lakhs.
Lesser the better!
The key to understanding this, is your purchase price should undoubtedly be
less than your total expected income i.e. your future cashflows. Additionally,
only considering the future cashflows won’t help you to arrive at the fair value.
As we know, Re. 1 in future is not worth as much as it is today (going by the
general concept of inflation). So, here we need to adjust the figure to make it
directly comparable with the present value. It is the basic idea behind
Discounted Cash Flow Analysis.
Let’s see how to calculate this figure:-
DCF – Discounted Cash Flow
CF - The amount of cash flow in a Year. CF1 is for the first year, CF2 is for
the second year, and so on…
r - discount rate or expected rate of return
n = Number of years for which future cash flow occurs
To simplify it Let’s take an example- If you are being offered a deal from your
friend where you will get Rs 6000 every year for next 5 years. And, for this you
need to pay Rs. 25000 today. Would you accept this deal?
If you simply see the cashflows, the total future income would be Rs 30,000
(6000x5). And upfront you need to pay 25,000. So your gain would be Rs 5000.
But is it really worthy?
Assuming an interest rate of 8% P.A , an investment of Rs 25000 in a fixed
deposit scheme would give you Rs 36,700. So why not invest in Fixed deposit
which also comes with ZERO risk.
Then, how much would you offer for this deal. The amount depends on your
target rate of return. Let’s say you expect a return of 12% per annum for
undertaking an additional risk rather than putting the amount in FD. So, in this
case the present value or DCF will be :-
= Rs 21628
Hence, a purchase value below Rs. 21628 would be called a good buy and this
exact amount would be the fair value. Similarly, when you are investing in any
shares or buying a whole business, you need to figure out the right price by
analyzing the expected cashflows. The important thing to note here is DCF
analysis won’t be applicable for all firms. Companies with relatively stable
cashflows like FMCG, Pharma, utilities are best suited to DCF analysis. Real-
estate, steel, automobiles or other industries which are exposed to significant
degree of cyclicality cannot be valued through this method.
2) Sum of the Parts Valuation (SOTP)
The method determines the net value of the firm by separately examining the
value of each investment done by the company through different business units,
associates or subsidiaries.
Let’s understand this with an interesting example:
Think, how would have McDonald’s decided the price of this combo? It’s quite
obvious that they would have added individual costs of the components and
then decided the final price. Note, the price of the combo would cost
somewhere around the sum of actual individual prices.
Similarly, there are many large corporates who are engaged in diversified set of
business activities across different industries.
Since the nature of revenue and cashflows of different companies vary
depending upon the type of Industry where they operate, the valuation of a
conglomerate or a holding company cannot be calculated with one method. So,
for this we need to calculate the value of each business unit. The aggregate
value of these units would be the Intrinsic value or the Fair Value of the
Holding Unit.
Let us see the valuation of a holding company, say Bajaj Holdings and
Investments Limited, considering its investments -
Bajaj Holdings and Investments has a market capitalization of 36192 crores. It
holds shares of the following companies-
(All figures in crores)
S.No. Name of the % of The market Bajaj
company holding cap of the Holdings and
company investments’
share
1. Bajaj Auto limited 33.43% 80648 26960.62
2. Bajaj Finserv 39.29% 113298 44514.78
Limited
3. Bajaj Auto 100% 25
Holdings Limited
4. Maharashtra 51% 4373 2230.23
Scooters
TOTAL VALUE OF INVESTMENTS OF BAJAJ 73730.63
HOLDINGS AND INVESTMENTS
Although the market capitalization of Bajaj Holdings and Investments Limited
is Rs 36192 crores, the investments held by this company value Rs 73730.63
crores.
It should be noted that the profits of the company when transferred to its
holding company as dividends attract taxes @ 17.65%. Thus, holding
companies are generally valued at around 20% lesser than the value of their
investments.
Here, Bajaj Holdings and Investments is trading at a discount of almost 50% of
total value of holdings, reflecting its undervaluation by the market.
3) Relative Valuation Method:-
The above discussed methods are absolute measures to calculate the intrinsic
value without reference of to any peer entity, Industry average or market
benchmark. However, there are several types of companies where investor
needs to rely more on the market behavior i.e. the way market is valuing
companies in different economic situations and market levels.
The basic idea behind the method is to identify similar type of companies and
conduct a comparative analysis to calculate the value of the firm.
Types of Relative Valuation metrics with Industries in which they’re used:-
· P/E (Price to Earnings ratio) :- FMCG , IT, Pharma
· P/B (Price to Book value ratio) :- Banking, NBFC, Real estate
· P/S (Price to Sales ratio):- Automobile, Textile
· P/FCFF (Price to Free Cashflow ratio) :- Oil and Gas, Steel
· EV/EBITDA (Enterprise value to operating profit) :- Airline, Telecom,
Automobile
1) P/E Ratio:- This is the most widely used tool to compare the valuation of
different stocks. The ratio gives you an idea of how much amount you’re paying
for each rupee of company’ earnings.
Where, Price = Current Market Price
EPS = Earnings Per Share (Net Profit / Number of Shares)
Example :- If the market price of the share is Rs 20, and EPS is Rs 5, then
P/E ratio of company = 20/5 = 4 times
This signifies that an investor is willing to pay Rs 20 to buy a share which is
currently generating an EPS of Rs 5 per year, so the investor is willing to pay 4
times more the amount actually earned by each unit of the company this year.
Why are investors paying 4 times for the share?
Higher P/E ratio usually expresses how expensive a stock is being traded in the
market. Investors’ expectation in long term and speculation of brand value
prompts them to pay higher value. This is because they have to buy the share
once, and they expect the company to keep generating earnings every year so
that his earnings in the long term will be far in excess of the price he is paying
to buy the share.
Should we always buy stocks with lower P/E ratio?
Novice investors can often make the mistake of buying stock based on just P/E
ratio. However, the P/E can be misleading sometimes.
As we know that higher the net profits of the company, higher will be the EPS
of the company and thus, lower P/E ratio.
Higher net profits of the company can be due to two possible reasons-
· A higher operating profit - due to better performance of the company.
· Some extraordinary profits earned by the company during the year.
Net profits due to increased efficiency and turnover of the company are
beneficial for the shareholders, but, if it is due to extraordinary transactions such
as sale of property, or any windfall gains, then we need to be cautious.
So, an investor should always dig deeper and find the reasons for low P/E ratio,
because, if it is on account of extraordinary profits, it is temporary, and
investment in such companies will not necessarily benefit the shareholders.
How do we decide that p/e is not very high?
For this, we have to see the Price/Earnings to growth ratio (PEG). PEG ratio is
based on the thought that a company should have an earnings growth rate
enough to justify its P/E.
Ideally, this ratio should be less than or equal to 1, i.e., growth > P/E.
In the example above, suppose the EPS growth rate is 2%, then
PEG would be 4/2 = 2 Therefore, this company is probably overpriced.
2) P/B ratio:-
Earnings are not the proper measure for evaluating companies with huge asset
base like Banks, NBFCs, Real estate companies etc. Because, profit tends to
fluctuate depending upon the economic condition, government policy and other
macro-economic factors. So, the more appropriate parameter is Price/BV.
The ratio measures the market value of the firm in relation to its Book Value.
Book value per share of the company is the value of assets proportionate to each
share of the company.
Let’s say a company, which is trading at a price of Rs. 150, has a total asset
base of Rs. 100,000 and the liabilities amount to Rs. 20,000.
In this case, the funds belonging to shareholders or net worth of the company =
Rs. 100,000 - 20,000 = Rs. 80,000.
So, if the number of shares is 1000, the book value per share is 80
(80,000/1000) and P/B would be
= 150/80 = 1.86
Ideally, a P/B of 1 is considered as fairly valued and a ratio of below 1 indicates
undervalued stock.
However, like P/E ratio, P/B ratio can be distorted. Any kind of acquisitions,
asset impairment, or share buybacks can affect the ratio significantly.
Furthermore, the ratio also ignores off balance-sheet items such as contingent
liabilities and thus deflates the total liabilities. In case of banking companies
also, a low P/B does not necessarily indicate undervaluation , it may be due to
worsening asset quality (High NPA).
So, investor should look for P/B vis a vis ROE or ROA as it gives an idea about
the productivity of the asset in addition to the relative valuation.
3) P/S ratio:-
Price to sales ratio values the company based on its turnover and not on profits.
This method of valuation e(cid:0)ectively assesses companies that possess high
potential of growth but are currently unable to make profits. There are certain
industries which are exposed to high degree of cyclicality and have a long
gestation period like Automobile. During the initial stage of the business,
profitability is not an appropriate way to measure the performance of the
company. In these industries Price to Sales ratio works as an effective tool to
determine the valuation of the company.
4) EV/ EBITDA :-
Enterprise value is the theoretical “take over price” of the company.
Ownership of the company is rooted in its shares. So, if you want to buy a
company, i.e., gain 100% control over its management, you need to buy all the
shares from the market.
So, your cash outflow for buying the control of company = market price per
share x number of shares (i.e., the market cap of the company)
But, when you get the complete ownership of the company, all the assets and
the liabilities of the company belong to you. Now, consider this, you paid the
price of market capital, which is determined by market forces, to buy actual
assets and liabilities while the actual cost of acquisition shall be the sum of all
the privileges (to use assets) and obligations (to pay loans) you get, once you
buy the business.
Enterprise value finds the actual cost of acquisition of “the business."
It is arrived as - Enterprise value = Market Capitalization + Debt – (Cash + bank
balance)
As soon as you buy the business, the cash belonging to the company now
belongs to you (the owner), and the debt liability is also your responsibility
now. Thus, cash is reduced from the cost, while debt is added.
To make a comparative valuation analysis of 2 similar companies:
Investor can use EV/EBITDA ratio to calculate the entire value of the business.
The major significance of EV/EBITDA is that it removes the effect of non-cash
items such as depreciation and amortization and considers the real earning of
the company.
The higher the enterprise value (greater numerator), the higher will be the ratio,
implying the business to be expensive.
Price to FCFF:
Free Cash Flow to the Firm (FCFF) basically means the amount of
cash flow generated by the firm in a particular period of time, after
adjusting all its operational and capital expenditures. Since, this cash
flow is determined after adjusting all expenditures, it can be
effectively used by a company to generate additional revenues.
Therefore, a firm with more FCFF has better chances of expansion.
Price to FCFF ratio is used to carry out a comparative study of free
cash flow and market cap of the company. IF P/FCFF is 5, then it
means that for every rupee of free cash flow generated, the market is
paying Rs. 5. In general, the ratio is lower the better.
Earnings and revenue can be easily manipulated but not cash flow.
Therefore, this ratio gives a more accurate picture for valuation.
How to Use These Methods:
The above mentioned methods of valuation are very important to know but
more important is their usage. As we’ve already discussed that investing is not
a science, it’s an art therefore, it’s not based on any sure shot formula. Please
note that these methods can not be used as it is because performance of
companies and industries can not be predicted accurately. It’s advised that
investors always use their discretion while investing.
Chapter 20: Behavioural Biases – the
Illusion Creators
As you’ve read earlier, the behavioural biases affect our routine decisions,
including those related to investing in stock, to a significant extent. So, it is
important to identify such biases and to remove them to make the best
investment decisions possible.
1. Familiarity bias towards known brands/names
Familiarity bias is indeed the most common bias that is seen in everyday life.
Under this bias, the investors may tend to overweigh the stocks of the
companies they work for, or they may be biased towards the stocks of brand
names they are aware of.
For example, choosing Britannia biscuits over Sunfeast because you are more
familiar with the Britannia brand. Likewise, you might end up picking up
Britannia’s stock over ITC.
Some other day-to-day examples are following the same route to work or home,
visiting the same store over and over again to shop for daily needs, wearing the
clothes of particular brands, eating the same flavour of ice-cream every time,
etc.
Though the theory of investment insists that investors must thoroughly research
and analyze the stocks before picking, usually, the stock investors invest in
public sector securities influenced by their familiarity and comfort.
When the investors invest in the same company they are working for, they don’t
realize, they are doubly risking their money. In case, the company does not
perform well, then, the employee may suffer reduced salary income and reduced
returns on the investments. Hence, investing in your own company may require
you to do a thorough analysis, such as consider the tax benefits, calculate the
anticipated returns, analyze the industry performance, transaction costs, etc. But
the familiarity bias drives the investors so firmly that they blindly invest in the
companies they have been working in for a few years.
This bias is commonly seen in those individuals who love to live within their
comfort zones. Such individuals fear to travel the untrodden path as
unfamiliarity makes them uneasy.
2. Representativeness: Representativeness is a widespread bias that is
governed by the image, representation, or past performance of a company. For
instance, if an investor considers a company to be a good company, then, he
may instantly choose to invest in it. But this can be misleading, as a company’s
brand image cannot judge the exact worth of a company. Conventionally, the
image of a company gets enhanced due to advertisement and promotional
activities.
There are two types of representative biases:
a. Horizontal Bias: This bias says that people tend to value a stock based on
the track record of its peers. So, they would try to forecast the performance of
the stock in the future based on the similarities with its analogue.
b. Vertical Bias: Investors often take the past performance of the stocks as the
representative of their future performance. Such biases are often referred to as a
‘Recency Bias’. The chasing of recent trends is a crucial part of technical
analysis.
For example, Cadbury was known to manufacture good quality delicious
chocolates until there were a couple of incidents where worms were reported in
its chocolates. This reporting immediately tarnished the brand image of
Cadbury, which brought down the value of its stocks.
Do these biases help in making the right investments?
The answer is yes and no both, as it depends on the term of investment you have
chosen. For small-term investments, past performance at times develops a
negative correlation with near-future performance. But for long-term
investments, the past performance tends to establish a positive relationship with
future performance.
The availability of information enhances representative bias
When the availability of specific information like extended news coverage of
highly performing stocks spread like wildfire, it grabs the attention of potential
investors immediately. Such news stimulates trading of shares due to the
development of immediate biases towards them.
3. Anchoring: Anchoring refers to using irrelevant information as a base to
make financial investments. It may also be put as getting fixed on past
information and using it to make inappropriate financial investments.
For example, an investor may get way too influenced by the buying cost of
security. And, he may use it as a reference to evaluate investing in that
particular financial stock. In the context of spending, the market participants
with this bias exist prominently everywhere.
Anchoring bias is commonly seen in both naïve as well as professional
investors. However, professional investors have more access and exposure in
investments to gauge themselves if they are letting these biases influence them.
Example: Suppose, you want to buy a property, and you get an initial quote of
Rs. 10,00,000 for a flat. Now, this works as a reference point for you. After a
few months pass, the market crashes and the prices of the property get lowered.
Hence, now suppose your dealer quotes you Rs. 9,00,000 for the same property,
you might like it without being aware that the current price is Rs. 8,00,000. This
happens because you got anchored to the initial price quote of 10,00,000 and so
anything lesser than that would mean a good deal to you.
The same principle works in stock investment too. You have seen security
priced at Rs. 100 and you want to purchase it, but find it overpriced. So, you
wait for the prices to soar down and the moment it touched Rs. 80, you jump
over to grab them. But, had you not been anchored to the initial hiked price of
Rs. 100, then, you would have waited further to see if the prices would step
down further. Later, you got to know that the prices dropped down to Rs. 65 just
a week later. Now, do you think that holding on to the initial pricing was wise
enough?
Beginner’s luck in investing
All of us often experience Beginner's luck in one or many instances. Remember,
winning the first time you played Business, Scrabble or Ludo games. On
winning the game the very first time we played, how excited we would get, and
we always thought that we had mastered the game right on the first go.
But what happened when you played the game for a few more times? Did you
continue achieving the same success or you lost many games? Well! The first
time when you won, it was due to Beginner’s luck. A beginner’s luck is when a
beginner experiences unexpected success against a seasoned/professional player
in a chosen activity.
The reason behind a beginner’s luck
A beginner’s luck leads to success at the first go because a beginner is free of
anchoring bias. Anchoring bias refers to anchoring or holding on to a piece of
information usually related to the past.
For example, if a seasoned investor has seen shares of MRF tyre trading at Rs.
100 and now the same company is trading at Rs. 1000, then, he will be reluctant
in buying the shares for 1000 bucks because it was available to him for 100
bucks some time ago. But, if a naïve investor with no investment background
looks at the share price of MRF tyre, then he takes Rs. 1000 as the base value
and will happily choose to invest in it if it seems promising.
Hence, the beginner’s luck happened due to a lack of price anchoring in this
case and not due to real luck.
4. Overconfidence Bias: Overconfidence refers to an investor having a bias
towards his prediction skills, his judgements about the market behaviour
and his cognitive abilities.
In these biases, the investor tends to over-evaluate not just his prediction skills
but also the information that he has received. In simple words, the investor is
over-enthusiastic and may act immediately based on an investment tip that he
gets from an advisor or that he would have read anywhere.
The investor considers himself to be smarter than other investors and advisors.
This brings in a lot of overconfidence in the investor, and he starts acting as per
his perceived knowledge of investment.
Examples of Overconfidence Bias:
Over Ranking: In this case, an overconfident investor ranks his knowledge and
performance as superior to that of others.
Controlling Situations: When an investor feels that he can control conditions
in his favour, then, he invests assuming the situations will be favourable. But
because of having the wrong assumption, he makes mistakes.
Timing: Usually, an investor may invest in a specific period, assuming the
company will start performing outstandingly, rendering profits well on
investment. In reality, business projects are always underestimated for timings
and mostly delayed beyond the proposed schedules.
Desirability Effect: Sometimes, the investors get desperate to get the desired
results. In such situations, the investor will overestimate the possibility of
something happening, but the probability of such happenings, in reality, is much
lesser.
Types of Overconfidence Biases:
a. Prediction Bias: Prediction biases usually happen while making frequent
investments. The investments based on predictions can be far from the realities.
Say, I am an overconfident investor predicting a 7% to 8% gain or fall in stock,
and I invest based on this prediction. But, the real fluctuation in prices turned
out to be 15%, which was revealed later. I fell for the trap due to prediction
bias.
The negative aspect of this type of bias is that I may underestimate the risk
involved in investing in a stock.
b. Certainty Bias: It refers to having overconfidence about a particular
investment considering it to be a good investment. This leads to investor trading
too often or too much at a time due to overconfidence. Also, these kinds of
investors end up building highly concentrated portfolios without doing thorough
research on the stocks they have invested in, inviting much higher risks of
incurring losses in the future.
Let us see the implications of overconfidence in detail:
Excessive Trading: Overconfidence often results in excessive trading. Since
the investors are overconfident about their knowledge, this makes them trade
more often. As per M. Zuckerman, under overconfidence bias, an investor turns
into a sensation-seeking personality with the following features to it.
• Derives Thrill: The adventure-seeking desire engages the person to keep
trying hands in trading.
• The Desire to Gain Experience: The investor desires to gain hands-on
experience by working on something new and exciting.
• No Inhibition: Trading is looked at as an activity that is accepted and is
appropriate as per the social norms. So, when an investor trades often, he is
gambling to mint money, which is within the legal framework. Thus, an
overconfident investor gets deeper into trading and does it even more.
• Fun and excitement: Trading shares is fun for some investors and kills
boredom.
• Excessively optimistic: Overconfident investors are overly optimistic about
the companies they are tracking. Their assumptions are miscalculated and are
overrated as compared to reality.
Under-diversification
As we saw under certainty bias, the overconfident investors tend to opt for a
concentrated portfolio because they are super confident about their investments
and put in all their money in chosen stocks. This results in under-diversification,
which is also a trait of seasoned investors, but the approach taken by them is
way too different as compared to overconfident investors.
The seasoned investors thoroughly analyze the funds, the companies, the
markets, the industries, and take a patient and calculated approach to generate a
concentrated portfolio which will give promising returns in the future. But, the
overconfident investors tend to invest money without doing any thorough
research. These investors believe themselves to be smart enough to make the
right decisions and end up generating an under-diversified portfolio.
5. Herd Mentality Bias
Man is a social being. He does not like to cut out from a trend or to opt out from
a movement, and marketers know this very well. They try to position a product
to create a brand such that people start relating to it. So, the brand becomes a
trend, and others blindly follow it to be a part of a social norm. In this bias, an
investor tends to copy other investors. This type of bias is dominated by an
investor’s instinct and emotions rather than the analytical approach taken to
understand a stock before investing in it.
The herd mentality is very much hard-wired in us, and we often act
unconsciously as per this mentality. It is due to the following two reasons:
a. Social Pressure: Man as a social being, seeks acceptance and approval of
others. This is why he follows a trend or norm.
b. The belief that a large group of people cannot be wrong: A man tends to
copy others because he thinks that so many people who have chosen to follow
the same path cannot be wrong.
Example 1
Suppose you visit Noida for the first time and you are looking for a good
restaurant to dine at. Suddenly, you come across a street with two posh-looking
restaurants right opposite to each other. Now, because you are new, you don’t
have any clue about which of the two is good. As you approach closer to the
restaurants, you see that one is filled with plenty of youngsters and the other is
empty. So, you think that the one which is crowded must be the one serving
good food, and you choose to eat there. After ordering the food, you felt that the
food quality is average and the food was just palatable.
Later, you try to dig deeper and go around asking in the locality about those two
restaurants. To your great surprise, you discover that the one busy with
youngsters was visited by college students on a sponsored outing because it
gave massive discounts on group outings. And the restaurant right opposite to it
is better in terms of food quality and taste and maintains good consistency of
food at all times. But, it had just opened at the time when you visited that place,
so you saw it empty.
So, you see how a herd mentality bias made you take a decision that acted
against your interest.
Example 2
Another example of this is that in a democratic country like India, the
politicians are chosen to a great extent by herd mentality bias. Strong visibility
of such biases is seen in the people of the middle class and lower class of the
society, who tend to follow each other. And, the result of such a majority has
not always been favourable in the past. The democratically chosen politicians
were not the best of the lot at all times.
The same dynamics work in the stock investment as well. What the majority of
people choose may not be the right option.
Example 3
A famous example of a herd mentality bias in financial investment is investing
in smartphone manufacturing companies.
When Blackberry was launched, it became the talk of the town. All top officials
shifted to Blackberry, which made it an expensive buy which was sought after
by all youngsters. Many technology companies like Blackberry do successfully
make a lot of noise in the market but often lack a good business model.
But, because Blackberry became a big sensation at one point in time, most
investors started investing in it. And, any naïve or biased investor would follow
the crowd and invest in it. But, the reality was far-fetched, and eventually,
Blackberry was thrown out of the market by other strong smartphone players
like Apple, Sony, etc. The herd mentality bias is so strong that if an investor is
advised to act contrary to what the majority of people are doing, then, it may
even instil fear. Not many investors have the guts to invest based on functional
analysis and research, because that may mean acting contrary to other investors.
No wonder! Avoiding herd mentality is considered to be the golden rule of
investment. The investors do get carried away by the mass behaviour of other
investors, and that is quite natural, though. This is why behavioural finance
needs to be learnt to enhance financial decision-making skills.
How to keep yourself at bay from herd mentality syndrome?
This is indeed one of the most common questions asked by naïve investors! For
this, you need to dig deeper in analysing the prospects of the investment before
investing in it. The more you know about a company’s stock, the better your
chances are of not falling into the herd mentality bias trap.
6. Commitment Bias: Commitment bias suggests that people develop an
attachment to their past ideas and beliefs, so much so, that they invariably keep
applying those ideas in new situations. Commitment bias is also referred to as
self-serving bias.
Commitment bias is usually seen in our day-to-day lives when we do things or
take decisions only to approve or justify our past actions. It is like one slippery
slope where a single slip is enough to pull you down completely.
For example, you seek help from a group of friends, but only one friend chooses
to help you. Now, the next time you approach the same group for help, you are
more likely to receive it from the same friend who helped you earlier. It is so
because that compassionate friend would choose to stay consistent with his
effort in the past. He seems to be a value-driven person who would like to stick
to the commitments he has made for himself. It is a typical example of
commitment bias. An investor can hold onto security longer than he had thought
of holding, just because he chose to invest in it, even when it is contrary to the
interest of the investor.
Commitment bias in simple words is like having a belief that the decisions we
took in the past were good. It is this belief that makes us refrain from
disinvesting shortly even when holding back some stocks may result in a big
loss.
This is why some legendary investors always suggest to never openly suggest
the names of good stocks to invest in on any public platform like News
channels, newspapers, etc. This is so because if a seasoned investor suggests on
a public platform to buy a stock, and later, he finds some flaws with this stock,
do you think he will be able to change his suggestion? Definitely not, because
now the advisor is a victim of commitment bias.
Hence, it is essential to do your research in stock investment as you do not know
whether the advisor is suffering from commitment bias.
7. Confirmation Bias
Confirmation bias indicates the tendency to use a piece of information to
support your perceived notions, and ignore the ones that are contrary to your
beliefs.
For example, if an investor is interested in investing in ‘Airtel,’ then, (s) he
would look for positive information that would support his decision. Hence, if
such an investor will come across any negative piece of information about the
company, he or she may tend to overlook it.
A sound investment strategy always looks for information that contradicts your
way of thinking. This is what most successful investors have been doing. The
point to note is that you need to approach investments with an open mind as the
shreds of evidence collected tend to flow in all different directions.
Consequently, you would analyze the multiple perspectives which will
overcome any influences or biases present.
Confirmation bias occurs in two different circumstances:
1. Selective absorption of information: When an investor selectively
absorbs information from the past happenings and acts based on this particular
information.
For example, you were travelling to colder places on holiday and used a face
compact that had a good moisture-retaining capacity and made you look lovely.
Now, you are back in India, where you experience hot tropical weather, and you
think of using the same compact because you remember it gave you amazing
results. But, the performance of that compact was relative to the weather, and so
the hot weather made your skin look oily and sticky.
The reason behind this is that you selectively retained information about a
make-up product. Of course, the same occurs in stock investment as well, where
you need to consider many factors to check the performance of a stock.
2. Misinterpretation of the information: Confirmation bias is commonly
seen when you have misinterpreted the information given to you.
Suppose you read somewhere that a company X is bound to perform 100 times
better in the coming decade if the industrial norms are modified in that sector.
But, to make this happen, the government will have to alter its current taxation
policies and structure.
So as an investor, you would keep track of information on this sector’s
development. Suppose a few days later, you read that the government has
chosen to modify two of its taxation policies to support the low and mid-cap
companies in that sector.
But you misinterpret the information to understand that the new change is for
big companies like X. And based on this information, you invest in the
company X. After 5 years, you realize that the prices of stock of company X
have only marginally increased, which forces you to disinvest.
Example of Confirmation Bias:
An investor came across a company ‘Z’ which is highly recommended by his
colleague. With a lot of interest, the investor starts searching for supporting
information to invest in that particular stock. Suppose he finds some supporting
information like a low debt-equity ratio or high cash inflow of the company and
some other danger signals like unfavourable policies. But he still chooses to
invest in company X under the influence of confirmation bias only to get
disappointed later.
8. Hindsight Bias
Hindsight Bias is a term in psychology, which explains the tendency of people
to overestimate their ability to predict the happening of an outcome that could
not have been practically possible to predict.
In Investing, the occurrence of hindsight bias is pretty common. The pressure of
investing in the right stock at the right time often ends up frustrating the
investors for not knowing better or for not noticing the rising trends earlier.
People look for simpler solutions to complicated problems and thus tend to
overthink and develop such biases. It is not that having these biases is wrong,
but sometimes these biases can force the investor to find a wrong link between
the cause and effect of investment.
Let’s take the example of a trader who invests in the stock market. He has two
options, either trading long or trading short. Trading long is buying a stock
hoping that the stock price will rise. Trading short is borrowing a stock, selling
it instantly with the idea of buying it back when the stock price decreases and
earning a considerable profit. The investor trades long and unfortunately, the
market responded contrary to the trade made by him. He angrily claims that he
knew this was going to happen and that is hindsight bias.
9. Gambler’s Fallacy
Gambler’s fallacy is also called Monte Carlo fallacy or the fallacy of the
maturity of chances. It is a widespread belief that if some event has occurred a
few times in a given period, then, it will happen less frequently in the future and
vice-versa.
Gambler’s fallacy is not correct as the past event cannot govern the probability
of occurrence of any game in the future.
How Does Gambler’s Fallacy Work in Financial Investments?
Gambler’s fallacy misleads the investors who end up taking the wrong
decisions. The long invested investors, who witnessed constant growth in stock
value over time, liquidate their shares due to gambler’s fallacy. It is so because
they believe that the value is more likely to decline after many consecutive
gains.
Example: Flipping of a Coin
Suppose you are playing the game of flipping a coin with your friend. The first
five flips led to ‘Heads’ each time, but just before the sixth flip, you turn
pessimist towards ‘Heads,’ and you feel that the 6th flip is more likely to be
‘Tails’ because the earlier five ones were ‘Heads.’
But, when you flip the coin, you see that the 6th flip is ‘Heads’ again! Why?
It is so because the probability of getting ‘Heads’ or ‘Tails’ in each flip is 50%.
And, each coin flip is completely independent of any of the past flips. It is a
wholly independent event with a probability of 50% each time. This is where a
gambler's fallacy dilutes your conviction and makes you liquidate your asset
only to prevent a loss that was anyway never happening.
10. Disposition Effect:
Disposition effect suggests that the investors have an innate tendency to identify
gains more quickly than to determine losses in any investment.
Selling security at a loss would mean that the investor’s decision of trading was
wrong, and, selling a stock at a profit would say that an investor took the right
trade decision. Hence, the investor would be more willing to sell off those
securities for which the prices have risen than to sell the ones that will incur
losses. But a good investor must get rid of a lousy performing asset at the
quickest to save on taxes.
Of course, the loss or profit in trading is always taken against the purchase price
of the security, which is a critical reference point. This theory is pretty much
in line with the ‘Prospect theory,’ which stated that losses prick twice as
hard as the joy of gains.
Implications of Disposition Effect
One of the most common implications of this effect is that the fear of loss
makes investors disinvest often. But in reality, they would have been better off
had they stayed invested for longer. Thus, the disposition effect restrains
investors from getting benefits of the stock price momentum.
To overcome this effect, an investor must choose to continually review his
underperforming assets and must consider selling them at the earliest.
11. Availability Bias: Availability bias refers to being biased towards the
readily available information. For example, the number of deaths each year in
India is far more due to Myocardial Infarction (Heart attacks) than car
accidents. But when somebody dies in an accident, we get to hear about it on
TV NEWS and read about it plenty of times in Newspapers. There was a survey
done recently to see what people state as the most common cause of deaths in
India, and to a great surprise, people chose road injuries are the biggest cause of
deaths. This is a classic example of availability bias, as people developed a bias
towards the available information.
How to overcome psychological biases?
It is essential to overcome biases to arrive at the right decisions. Every one of
us, whether an investor or a non-investor, is under the influence of one or many
biases. But a successful investor or a businessman is the one who has learnt to
see things beyond these biases.
So let us figure out ways to deal with behavioural biases:
1. Look at the Big picture: The investment market is highly inter-linked both
at domestic as well as at global levels. When you only look at
investments made by you, then, your perspective of observing the stock
market also gets reduced.
But when you see the happenings around, closely watching the growing
industries, the industry players, etc., then, you see the realistic view of the
market.
Investments are bound to fluctuate, especially in the short run, but when
you learn to analyze the investment scenario, then such fluctuations do
not matter anymore.
As per the advice of Daniel Kahneman, “Investors must check the
frequency with which they see how well their invested stocks are
performing.”
The following questions will help you to overcome biases better:
a. What is the reason for considering a particular stock for investment?
b. What is the time horizon available with you for staying invested?
c. What are the expected returns after one year from this investment?
d. What is the risk of this stock on your overall portfolio?
e. What if the stock under-performs your expectation? Would you still
stay invested for a long time or would you want to quit? Also, try
to reason out the chosen option.
f. Are you maintaining a checklist?
2. Rely less on what you see: Avoid making a judgement by looking at the
reports or trends shown prominently on all news channels. Instead, you
must try to engage yourself more in reading about the industries or
companies where you want to invest or have already invested.
3. Be knowledgeable: The more you learn about stock investments, the lesser
your decisions are affected by behavioural biases. Knowledge is by far
the most reliable instrument that is going to help you master the game of
stock investment. Of course, you cannot learn every aspect of it, but
reading can add a lot to your investment skills.
4. Follow a good mentor: If you are entirely new to investing and know not a
thing about it, then, it would be wise to follow an investment guru like
Warren Buffet, Charlie Munger, Ben Graham, Peter Lynch, etc. It will
help you to overcome a lot of apprehensions and the widespread
misinterpretations of stock market investments.
5. Look at stock investment as a business owner: As we have discussed
earlier, too, every investment you make in the stock market must be
looked at from the owner’s perspective. You need to consider yourself as
the owner of the company, and then analyze what you would get out of
the investment made in the company.
6. Review your biases periodically: You need to review your preferences
periodically with the investments that you were tempted to make, under
the influence of those biases.
Make a list of all the biases that you are a victim of, and also make a note
of how the investments done under those biases are performing now.
It will be good learning if you add a list of top-performing stocks under
your chosen sectors of business. You must keep tracking your investment
against the benchmark investment that is performing the best in that
particular industry. This practice will be an eye-opening activity for you
that will help you to see beyond your biases and act wisely in the future.
7. Find someone who challenges your investment opinion all the time:
This is indeed one of the most effective ways of checking your
investment strategies. Encourage your spouse, your father, your mum,
your son/daughter, or any other family member or a friend to act as a
critique of all your investment ideas.
You and your critique must get involved in a healthy conversation where
you have to defend your investment ideas from a contrary viewpoint. This
exercise will help you to see loopholes clearly in your investment ideas.
Okay, let’s answer an interesting question-
Q. Which is the most common bias seen?
Poll: Which of the following behavioural biases affects investment decision-
making the
most?
Source: CFA Institute, Financial News Brief
This survey involved 724 participants from across the globe. From the
graph above, it is clear that herding is the most common bias, and accounts
for 34% solely amongst all other biases.
Chapter 21: Stock Investment Manifesto of
Legendary Stock Investors
Ben Graham’s Approach to Value Investing
Ben Graham’s investing principles are widely followed and looked up to across
the globe. Graham’s approach revolved around analyzing the financial
statements of the company. Graham believed that everything about a company
could be known by analyzing its financial statements.
But, unfortunately, the quantitative factors do not cover all the aspects of
investing; nevertheless, here are some of the vital contributions of Benjamin
Graham, in the field of value investing
:
The three concepts are the founding principles of investing, based on which we
will study everything else. So let’s understand them.
Margin of Safety
“Margin of safety is achieved when securities are purchased at prices
sufficiently below intrinsic value to allow for human errors, bad luck, or
extreme volatility in a complex, unpredictable, and rapidly changing world.”
– SETH KLARMAN
Margin of Safety
The margin of safety is a principle which states that an investor wisely invests
in those securities where the current listed price of the stock is lower than its
intrinsic value. The intrinsic value of the stock is the fair value that is arrived at
after the fundamental valuation of the stock is done.
The margin of safety provides a great deal of protection to the investors during
bad times. As it is, the investment world is highly volatile and is subject to
errors, unexpected events, or bad luck. In such cases, the margin of safety
provides a great deal of comfort to the investors.
The concept of Margin of Safety was first introduced by the famous American
Stock Investor named Benjamin Graham. Benjamin Graham was the tutor of
Warren Buffet, and Buffet learnt most of his investing skills from Benjamin
Graham.
Example: If you want to build an aircraft that can carry a weight of 100 kgs at a
time, you would instead make an aircraft that can withstand 150 kgs of weight
but would allow only 100 kgs for a single flight. Here, the excess weight-
bearing capacity of 50 Kgs is the margin of safety.
Why Must You Consider the Margin of Safety?
1. The intrinsic value calculation of the stock might not be correct always. As
humans, we are all bound to make errors. So choosing a share with price which
is below the intrinsic value gives an excellent safety for the investment.
2. The future of the market is highly unpredictable. Thus, a reasonable deal
invites greater security!
Mr. Market?
Mr. Market loves to fly high in the sky, goes
up and up, and flies freely. Whoosh! The
very next moment you see him toppling
down to hit the ground. You are stumped to
see what happened! But, worry not, this is
Mr. Market’s nature to keep you entertained
with its roller-coaster ride.
So when Mr. Market is flying high, you must
enjoy the ride by selling overpriced stocks,
but when Mr. Market is sinking, then you must buy good stocks.
Cigar Butt Approach
Have you seen discarded cigar butts lying on the streets? Those butts are used
and discarded, and are dirty but can still give you the joy of that last puff. Of
course, you get to enjoy it only if you have the guts to pick a dirty cigar butt.
The same analogy has been used by Benjamin Graham to describe the
negatively performing companies whose stocks have tumbled down to become
so cheap, that they are as good as the free cigar butts on the streets.
Such stocks are dirt cheap, and provide a golden chance to smart investors to
invest in them. Of course, there is a lot of negativity and under-performance
related to these stocks, which creates a panic in the market. But, for smart
investors, it is a golden ticket to invest and reap huge benefits in the future.
To summarize, a cigar butt approach of investment suggests that you invest in a
stock keeping a considerable margin of safety, which provides a great deal of
coverage to you at all times. When you invest in such low performing stocks,
you still don’t lose anything; if the company liquidates, the liquidation value of
each stock will be much higher than your current purchase value.
Chapter 22: Learning to Invest in Stocks
Peter Lynch is considered to be a great stock investment guru and has one of the
best track records as a mutual fund manager. He is valued as one of the most
influential personalities behind the concept of Value Investing. So let’s
understand his investment model to understand value investing better.
“Never buy the hottest stock in the hottest industry.”
– PETER LYNCH
The Peter Lynch Model of Stock Picking
This chapter is crucial to understanding the world of investing broadly. It
introduces you to the key aspects of stock investment, which will help you in a
big way in understanding the indicators of good stocks.
It will be interesting to read these guidelines which build the right intent to
approach stock investment.
1. Buy Simple Businesses
A word of caution for you to note is never to buy a business that you don’t
understand. Please remember you can’t value businesses that you don’t
understand. So, let's understand this through a concept which is referred to as
the ‘circle of competence.’
CIRCLE OF COMPETENCE
The circle of competence is a popular concept that has been devised by the guru of
stock market investment, Warren Buffet. Warren Buffet, in one of his letters to the
shareholders of Berkshire Hathaway in 1996, wrote:
“What an investor needs is the ability to evaluate selected businesses correctly.
Note the word "selected": You don't have to be an expert on every company or
even many. You only have to be able to evaluate companies within your circle
of competence. The size of that circle is not very important; knowing its
boundaries, however, is vital.”
In simple words, the circle of competence refers to those areas where we have
enough knowledge through experience or studies.
Euler Diagram
As per this concept, an investor must carefully select the stocks of those companies
which he understands well. It is so because a doctor would know which drug or
which pharmaceutical company is doing well. The doctor would even know the
ethics of that pharma company. He would also be aware of the drugs that will be
launched soon by the company. So in short, a doctor knows and understands the
pharma companies a lot better. Hence, the probability of picking up good stocks of
pharma companies is the highest in the case of a doctor.
But, if a doctor chooses to pick up stocks of a microchip company or an electrical
goods company, then, he is more likely to make investments based on the external
perception of the companies. Here stock picking will be based on superficial
knowledge, which invites a high possibility of making mistakes.
As Warren Buffett puts it—it is imperative to identify companies dealing in your
core competency areas and start with investing in them. Though the circle will be
extremely narrow when you start investing, it can be widened over time slowly. It
has been observed that people tend to make more mistakes in picking stocks when
they stray from this discipline.
Most successful business people identify the perimeter of their circle of competence
and operate inside it. Of course, over time, they keep working hard to build up their
knowledge and competence in those new areas in which they venture in due course
with sufficient knowledge.
One important thing to note about the circle of competence is that it is not the size
or the number of businesses you target, but, it is about how well you understand the
business you have chosen. If you think your knowledge is restricted to just one area,
then it is better to start investing money only in that one business. Slowly as you
build experience and exposure of other businesses, then you must consider
investing in them.
In the above diagram, your investment target should be the companies falling in
circle A (the innermost circle). Please note that the size of the circle (A) does not
matter at all; what matters is that you must never cross this circle. Besides, you
must simultaneously keep working in those companies that fall in circle - 2.
Over the years, you would learn enough about the companies falling in circle-2;
then, you will have more opportunities to invest. But for creating wealth in stock
investment, a few assured picks are far better than vesting your interest in many
stocks.
So going with this concept, it is straightforward and clear that:
● If you are a doctor, then invest, in pharma companies
● If you are an engineer, then, pick up, tech stocks
If you are a biotechnologist, then, pick up pharma stocks
●
If you are an architect, then, pick up heavy industry stocks
●
The key takeaway here is that you must not get confused when I say invest in
●
those companies which you understand well. You don’t need to hold a degree
or be a master analyzer to follow these companies. Even an average investor
can understand companies with focussed research and efforts.
Note: 1. The width of an investor’s area of competence can be defined by his
spending habits, types of products used by him generally and the profession
he is in.
According to Lynch, our biggest research tools are our eyes, ears, and
common sense. If you find something fishy about the company, its best to
avoid it, as there cannot be just one cockroach in the sink. We buy dozens of
things every week, so, if something attracts you as a consumer, that’s a good
starting point to start reading about that company as a potential investor.
2. Look for Boring Companies in Not so Exciting Industries
Let us take the example of Bitcoin (cryptocurrency) to understand whether the
investments should be boring or exciting. Bitcoin is by far the most successful
cryptocurrency of the world. A Cryptocurrency is a virtual currency that uses
cryptography for security. Bitcoin picked up considerable momentum due to its
high volatility inviting large price fluctuations.
It is loved by investors who are high-risk oriented and believe in being
speculative to make quick, substantial gains.
Graph Title: Bitcoin Price index from October 2016 to October 2018 (In
US Dollars)
As you can see in the graph, the Bitcoin value started at USD 697.37, reached
USD 13,860.14, and dropped to USD 6,320 in October 2018. So, you can see
the stark variation in the price of Bitcoin, which is why it has become so
popular.
Likewise, people like to trade in stocks because they find it exciting to see the
stock prices hiking, which enables them to make money. But volatility is not a
measure to define your success in stock investment at any time, as we have
already seen that any volatile commodity which has risen to an enjoyable hike
takes a steep fall in the next few moments due to its instability. Hence stock
traders who believe in chasing highly volatile stocks are often left disappointed,
as the prices are extremely fluctuating with no substantial gains in the longer
run.
So, if your targeted investments appear to be boring, then, you are on the right
track. If the investments seem to be exciting, then, you need to reconsider your
strategy of investment.
3. As an Investor Prefer Slow-Changing Industries
A good investor always welcomes change, but the change in the industry must
be slow and relevant. Though the industry is bound to change, yet, the ethics,
the motivation and the basic intent of the industry must remain the same.
From an investor’s point of view, let us look at the following examples:
Companies like Coca-Cola have hardly changed themselves over the years.
Coca-Cola has managed to grow multi-fold and enjoys a dominant market
position. These companies serve as an ideal investment option as the dynamics
of running the company has sustained itself over the years. Such companies
serve as an ideal investment option, as the strategies of running these companies
have successfully been proven over the years.
But on the other hand, the fast-changing companies like Nokia, Blackberry, and
Kodak gained a lot of popularity but were quickly kicked out of the business.
They lost huge market shares as they missed a few cycles of change to launch
newer versions of their latest products. Of course, it is exceptionally challenging
to innovate new viable products every few months. It is obvious that companies
that require such high levels of innovation to compete will eventually die out
someday.
The moral of the story is that as an investor look for companies that evolve and
change, but relatively slowly as compared to such fast-changing companies like
Nokia, Blackberry, etc.
4. Figure Out ‘The Inevitables’
Companies that are backed by solid management and have remained ethical in
their approach are bound to bounce back successfully defying all odds.
Such companies are called as ‘The Inevitables’ by Warren Buffet. For example,
a) Coca-Cola: Long back Coca-Cola diversified to launch a new variant
called Cherry Coke, which was a big disaster. Of course, a lot of funds
were required for research, launch, and to promote Cherry Coke.
Unfortunately, this new product did not do well and had to be called off.
Coca-Cola suffered huge losses, which resulted in delayed returns to the
stock investors. But eventually investing in Coca-Cola did pay off for
investors, and they were able to get good returns on their investments.
The lesson it teaches us here is that the loss of focus may happen
temporarily in good companies because every company goes through a
learning phase. Most importantly, every learning in business either brings
you profits or an invaluable experience to grow and develop further.
b) Gillette: A few decades back, Gillette, which is the market leader in the
blade industry, thought of diversifying its business. It started exploring oil
aggressively but failed miserably in it. Expanding into oil exploration
cost it heftily, but, still, Gillette could sail through the losses smoothly as
it was the market leader (held 60 % market share) in the blade industry. It
could easily bounce back with consistent profit inflow and eventually
paid off very high dividends to its investors.
5. Be Patient as an Investor
One of the important things to note here is that as an individual investor,
one must go slow in choosing stocks. Take ample time to read and gather
information about your preferred companies, and always remember that
‘haste makes waste.’
6. Small Investments do Matter!
As a small investor, you may think that by investing a small value of
money, how will you earn satisfactory returns? Small individual investors
believe that by buying a few shares, nothing substantial can be gained. But
even a few right investments can fetch much bigger returns with the power
of compounding.
Interesting Information on the Psychology of an Individual Investor
A common fear that a small investor carries is that he or she may have
little chances of survival in the stock market as compared to huge
investors. Often, it is believed that big influential investors like renowned
businessmen or celebrities have direct access to the company’s inside
information, as they know the top officials of the company very well. So
it is believed that they can take advantage of the information revealed
secretly to them and act accordingly, to fetch immense returns.
But the fact is that the insider’s information available to influential people
might not be correct at all times as even big companies hire highly skilled
sales professionals to plant a good image of the company in the minds of
influential big investors. Any information which is planted does not act in
the best interests of the investors.
On the contrary, small investors must be happy that they are away from
this intended manipulation. So they are free to place bets based on the
ethical evaluation of the businesses, which invites much higher chances
of success.
7. Never Believe the Advice That You Read or Hear
As an individual investor, always try to dig deeper to understand a
company before investing in it. You must never blindly believe the advice
that you get to read in the newspaper or hear on the NEWS channels.
8. Choose the Growing Companies in India
Identify the growing companies in India and invest in them as a long-term
investor to get hefty returns in the future. But, as Warren Buffet states, ‘if
you are not willing to own a stock for ten years, then don’t own it even for
10 minutes.’
These are some of the suggestions that you must keep in mind always.
Individual investors like Warren Buffet did grow out to become multi-
billionaires just by taking the right approach to investment.
9. How helpful is it to Check out the Latest Quarterly Report of the
Company?
Most investors try to gauge a company’s performance by checking its latest
quarterly published report. In reality, these reports give a snapshot of the most
recent quarterly performance of the company, which can be misleading.
Such reports work if you are trading in stocks to target short-term earnings.
Quarterly reports do not tell anything about the long-term survival of the
company, nor do they talk about the management practices of the company. So,
one cannot make out anything about the prospects of the company just by
looking at its current report, even though it might look promising.
10. Go for Businesses that are Focussing in a Niche Market
Do you know that big companies like Coca-Cola consistently buy their shares?
Companies with focussed niches are easier to target than otherwise. For
example, a company X might be manufacturing five different products – a,
b, c, d, and e. And, suppose only a is outperforming and other products are
underperforming. But, the consolidated annual report of the company
shows positive growth indicating good profits. So, as an investor, you
might get tempted to invest in it! But, can you rely on the future of the
company, as for how long can a single product overshadow four other
underperforming products?
Hence, as a convention, any company which is into multiple businesses
must reveal a separate business report for each of its businesses. But, from
an investor’s view, it gets complicated to understand the performance of
such companies, and hence, it would be wiser to avoid such companies at
least in the initial learning stages.
11. Check Business ethics
The negative growth of a company should be reported as promptly as a positive
one. A company cannot keep outperforming at all times, and cannot show
higher cash inflows too. A company may not incur losses but may have
made substantial investments to expand or diversify, which must reflect in
its cash outflow and must be revealed as it is in the annual report.
12. The Proportionate Increase in Stock Value
According to seasoned investors, theorists, and fundamentalists, the stock price
must appreciate such that for every Re. 1 retained by the company, the
shareholder must earn Re. 1. For example, if a company chooses to retain
Rs. 100 from the profits and does not give it away as dividends, then,
shareholders’ wealth must eventually rise by Rs. 100.
13. Beware of companies making too many predictions
Beware of the company that shows too many positive predictions, as it is a bad
management practice. There is no surety of such predictions turning true!
And it surely manipulates the behaviour of market buyers, sellers, and
brokers, which is not ethical. And of course, such companies may lose out
on being ethical on various fronts as they have already compromised on
their ethics here.
Also, beware of the companies who claim to have been consistently
performing at or above the declared targets. Remember that no company
can always meet declared targets or supersede them for several years. There
is a great possibility of making up the data here.
14. Prospering Industry
If a company is into multiple businesses, then, not all businesses of a company
will increase its profits. Of course, a company’s growth is directly
dependent on the growth of the industry. But, when the industry is suffering
setbacks, the same might get reflected in the company’s performance after a
while.
Usually, if the company’s management is highly talented, it works hard to
minimize the ill-effects of the industry. This may prolong the latent period
for the losses to show up for the company. So as an investor, you need to
look at industries that have positive growth potential in the future. Let us
understand this with an example:
Example: Warren Buffett had long back invested in the textile business.
He was incredibly blessed to have a great dedicated team of labourers and
managers who could handle work very efficiently. The textile industry was
struggling to mark its existence in those days.
But Warren Buffett did not feel the negative influence of the textile
industry on his business, because his efficient team kept performing well to
minimize the ill-effects of the industry on the business. But eventually, the
business had to be shut as the industry itself was in its darkest phase.
Consequently, Warren Buffett suffered enormous losses for he had invested
heavily in that business. So a good management team can overshadow the
effects of the adverse market influences. If the team had not worked so
efficiently, then Warren Buffett would have shut this business long back,
and would have undoubtedly incurred much fewer losses.
Morale: Stocks of promising ventures may give mediocre returns if the
industry is not performing well, but the same stocks can fetch better returns
if the sector does well.
15. The Intrinsic Value Increases Early
The Company’s intrinsic value rises at a faster pace as compared to market
recognition of its success.
As soon as the news of any new business expansion is out, the positive
effect is seen on the share prices. It should be noted that the company has
not started earning additional revenue yet, but the intrinsic value starts
soaring high.
16. Follow the Investment Principle
The true underlying principle of any business is that the ‘investors gain as
the market goes down.’ In reality, only dis-investors lose as the market
goes down, because when the market is down, then, it’s time to buy more
shares of the promising companies at a lower price.
17. Avoid Making Decisions Based on Predictions
Nobody ever has, never had, and will never have any idea about where the
stock market will be a year later. Hence, you must avoid taking any
decisions based on predictions that you get to hear or read.
18. Follow a Good Strategy
The investment market is ideal as long as the investor sticks to a sound investment
strategy. A good investment strategy seldom fails!
19. Invest Wisely
Never buy a mediocre business at a bargained price. Always put your brain to test
while picking up a low priced stock.
20. Analyzing the company’s present worth
Analyzing businesses does not require any technical knowledge to
understand Beta profits, or decoding the modern portfolio theory,
speculating efficient markets, looking for option pricing or emerging
markets, etc. It just needs a detailed eye, patience, and skill to analyze a
company’s present worth.
21. Stock Split
Some companies opt to split their high-priced stocks to attract investors.
But the stock split of top-priced shares does no good. This is so because the
companies attract non-value investors who speculate, which results in price
swings.
22. Investment Motives of a Company
The investment motives of the top management must be coupled with the
right investment price. For example, it is always wise to buy 10%
ownership of a promising company Z, at a price of Rs. ‘X’ per share, rather
than acquiring it 100% at a 2X price per share.
23. Mergers and Acquisitions
Most companies get into the acquisition of other companies only to satiate their
ego. While many other companies believe that by acquiring their efficient
management will make an average performing company an over-
performing one, but this is not always true!
The management must instead make the acquisitions for the following
reasons:
a. The acquired company has the potential to grow further.
b. The acquired company has technical know-how which will help the
acquiring company to cut competition.
c. The acquired company is available at a cheaper valuation.
The biggest challenge that comes in the acquisition of a company is to be
fair to the shareholders of both the companies.
24. Working Capital Status
The spurt in debtors and inventory of a company indicates that it is facing
working capital issues. It is an important metric of financial liquidity,
business efficiency and overall operations of the company. Thus,
inefficient working capital management will lead to financial trouble, sale
of fixed assets and even shutting down of business operations.
25. A piece of advice for young investors is that they must invest in touch
and feel kind of businesses where they can understand the value of the
products by using them: Example, Gillette, and Colgate.
Note: The research on the points discussed above brings in a lot of confidence
in you as an investor. Your small seeds of investments if placed rightly, have
the potential to grow into an immense wealth over the years. Hence, this
research is a must-do for long-term investment returns.
Chapter 23: Who Is My Well-Wisher in the
Stock Market??
You must have read that the bitter hard-core reality of the stock market is that
‘Nobody is your well-wisher in the stock market.’ Yes, you read it right!
Though there are plenty of stock advisors or brokers to help you in making
investments, yet, they are all working for their profits first. They don’t care
about your investments; all they care about is their fat commissions received
from their suggested investments.
The following participants act as advisors in the Stock Market:
Now, let us see the hidden facts behind the advice of each of these advisors.
Brokers
The brokers advise you to buy or sell a stock and earn a brokerage fee out of it.
The brokers make money via commissions earned by buying or selling shares.
So they advise you to invest in those funds from which they can earn a hefty
brokerage fee.
Generally, brokers give five different types of ratings to the investors, which are
buy, accumulate, hold, underweight, and sell.
Out of my personal experience, here is what the broker’s ratings mean:
Sell: The brokers are required to be on good terms with the CEOs of the
companies, and hence, the brokers refrain from suggesting to SELL.
Underweight: It is their softer way to suggest SELL.
Hold: It reflects that you must start selling the stocks as they do not appear to
be promising to the broker anymore.
Accumulate: It reflects holding the stocks.
Buy: The brokers usually have to meet their monthly brokerage targets by
facilitating more transactions through stock recommendations. So ‘buy’ does
not assure that the stock is worthy of being bought.
Credit Rating Agencies
It is not recommended that you invest your money based on the credit ratings
given by rating agencies, as you might be misguided. Here's how:
Companies are dependent on the ratings of these agencies for fundraising, and
hence, they offer the agencies hefty commissions to obtain good ratings.
Consequently, the ratings presented by these credit rating agencies might be
misleading. There are some credit rating agencies that work in favour of the
companies and not investors since they have to be loyal towards those who
compensate them.
Advisors
Every year, advisors need to make the research report of the companies, which
require them to meet the company’s senior officials frequently. So, they need to
take special care of the company’s top officials’ interests, to be able to retrieve
the financial data from them. Thus, in short, the ratings are always manipulated
to show the companies as excellent investment opportunities.
Mutual Fund Distributors
Even mutual fund distributors work for their selfish motto. They suggest only
those funds which will give them maximum returns.
Relationship Advisors in the Bank
When you visit your bank, you often ask your RM, which insurance policy or
stock market fund should you invest in? And you will find your RM instantly
suggesting a few policies and a few funds with a lot of conviction. But beware
of this fact, that your RM will only indicate that policy/scheme/fund in which he
earns the maximum commission. The RMs or other sales staff of financial
institutions are paid both in kind and cash to promote the sale of a specific
scheme or a fund.
So imagine! If by selling an X fund, your RM is sent on a free trip to Singapore,
and if by selling a Y fund, he is sent to Dubai, and, suppose he wishes to go to
Dubai, then, he will present Y fund as a better investment option as compared to
X in his interest.
Sadly, this is the hard-core reality that has existed in the stock market
investment for a long time. The poor investors are used as a bait to earn the
brokerage commission from trading or to get a commission from the companies.
Tip: You must get involved in stock investment yourself by learning the very
basics of how to select the right stocks. It may be a little time taking, but it is
surely not difficult. I believe that by the end of this book, you will be equipped
with the right knowledge and tools to assess stocks by yourself.
One interesting thought to ponder here is, ‘Why is it important to give 100%
honest advice in the financial sector?’
Financial advice plays a critical role in defining huge gains or losses for an
investor. With one right financial advice, an investor can mint multi-billions,
and with one wrong advice, he loses the golden opportunity to create such
enormous wealth.
When it comes to other areas, loss is limited to the false advice that has been
given. For example, if you buy a faulty car or a scooter, or property based on
the advice of a professional advisor, then the loss is restricted to just a car or a
scooter or a property.
But in the case of financial advice related to stock investment, the loss could be
unlimited. Imagine! You wanted to buy a share X that is worth Rs. 100, and you
seek a financial advisor’s help. He advises not to invest in share X, instead
suggests some other share Y. Out of confusion, you forgo the opportunity to
invest money in either of the shares.
After 10 years, the share X’s value appreciated to Rs. 50,000. Suppose, you
intended to buy ten shares of X, it would have fetched you Rs. 5,00,000. But,
because of the wrong advice of the broker, you lost out on this excellent
opportunity. Thus the loss is enormous due to the power of compounding.
So, being a financial advisor is a huge responsibility, as with your one advice,
either an investor can create enormous wealth or can incur huge losses. Hence,
the financial advisor’s job is highly responsible and must be chosen by people
with full ethics and integrity.
An Interesting Insight!
Beware!! Often things that are too BIG TO FAIL… are covered up
As citizens of India, we have faith in the Indian public sector banks, and we
seek their help and guidance in planning our financial investments, right? But
the reality is that with public sector undertakings, the picture is not as good as it
looks.
There have been a few massive scams done by big financial institutions in the
past. A lot of noise was made to highlight these scams, but no legal actions
were taken against these banks.
A recent report released by RBI for 2017-2018, states that the public sector
banks accounted for 92.9% of the amount involved in scams, whereas the
private sector banks accounted for 6% only.
Here are the graphs giving a clear picture of the fraudulence reported by public
sector banks in the past.
Outstanding frauds were done by governmental financial institutions
PSUs ate away crores of rupees which went on to become a viral scam. But
the government, instead of taking any legal action against PSUs,
recapitalized the public banks and charged hefty taxes from citizens to make
up for the losses.
Do you know why? It is so because PSUs are TOO BIG TO FAIL. Now let’s
see what is ‘Too big to fail theory’.
TOO BIG TO FAIL THEORY
Certain financial institutions are so well integrated into the Indian economy,
that, their failures would devastate a more significant economic system of
the country. Hence, for the economic welfare of the country, the government
is bound to support such institutions when they face any significant failures.
Here is what happens if ‘TOO BIG TO FAIL INSTITUTIONS FAIL’.
Example: SBI
SBI has around 22,500 branches and 58,000 ATMs. The total asset value of
SBI is Rs. 37 trillion, which is more than $ 555 billion. There are more than
50 crore Indian customers, who have put their faith in SBI by saving money
in it.
So if at any time the SBI is dissolved, it will doom the money invested in
millions leading to significant economic devastation. Thus, it will crash the
Indian economy at once. Therefore such institutions are named as ‘Too Big
to Fail.’
Currently, SBI is planning to increase its market share to 22% from 17%,
owing to the growing demand of the public banks in India. So, it will be
even more difficult to dissolve this institution in the future legally, as this
would mean the failure of the Government of India. So these institutions
continue to flourish, but the good part is that they have mended their ways
due to the entry of foreign banking companies.
Currently, three banks have been recognized by RBI, which can be
categorized as too big to fail banks, which are SBI, ICICI Bank, and HDFC
bank.
Information fact: Do you know that LIC has earned a bad reputation for
mishandling people’s money by providing a meagre rate of interest on the
investments made?
Chapter 24: The Fallacian Trap – A Self-
Proposed Theory
The Fallacian Trap is one of my self-devised theories, which is inspired by
the common fraudulent practices seen in the investment industry. It is an
interesting theory to study, and many people become victims of this scam.
Stock brokerage companies indulge in scams, which I call ‘The Fallacian
Trap’. These scams target the people who fall for fancy schemes or plans. The
brokerage companies mint money out of the folly of these innocent people.
To understand this scam, let us take a look at the following example. A
brokerage company pulls out the contact details of 1000 people randomly and
divides them into two groups – say, Group A and Group B. Each, Group A
and Group B contain 500 people each.
To Group A, the company tells Reliance shares will hike in price (just an
example). To Group B, the company tells Reliance shares will drop in price.
Now, let’s assume that owing to market fluctuations, the price of shares hiked.
So the 500 people falling in Group A gained faith in the stock brokerage firm,
as the stock prices behaved as predicted by the firm. On the contrary, Group B
lost faith in the company, and the company shifted its focus to Group A now.
Again the 500 people in Group A are divided into two groups – Say Group ‘a’
and Group ‘b.’ Each of Group ‘a’ and Group ‘b’ has 250 people in it. Now,
once again, the stock advisory company tells the group ‘a’ that the prices will
hike, and it tells group ‘b’ that the prices will fall. Now, suppose, the prices for
group ‘a’ are hiked again. So, group a’s faith is reinstated in the company and
group ‘b’ lost their faith in it.
Now, the company further divides the remaining 250 people into two different
groups and repeats the same process. The handful of people remaining at the
end have tested the company’s stock price predictions several times and have
gained confidence in the company’s investment advisory skills. This is the most
vulnerable set of people for the ‘Fallacian Trap’.
The stock advisory firm now shares tempting investment schemes to trap the
filtered set of people. These schemes usually act as a trap for innocent people
who lose their money later.
So, this is how innocent investors like you and me fall for the trap. In the
financial world, everyone is for their gains first. But lucky you to have found
out about such loopholes through this book.
Chapter 25: How Many Stocks Must You
Own?
By now, you have read the basics of stock market investment and the rules or
guidelines that help you to create successful ventures fetching high returns. But
after having read so much about how to invest, the fundamental question
remains the same, which is, ‘how many stocks should I own to have a significant
investment portfolio?’
If you too had this question resonating on your mind all this while, then, don’t
worry! As you are not alone in finding an answer to this.
In earlier days, the investments in stocks were guided by the modern
management theory. As per the theory, the investors are taught to, ‘never lay all
the eggs in one basket.’ Rather, they should look at diversifying their portfolio
to diversify the risk. But nowadays, a concentrated investment is considered a
better bet than a diversified one.
Today, it is believed that an investor must lay all his eggs in one basket and
watch that basket grow. This concept is believed and followed by all investment
gurus worldwide. It is so because the idea of value investing has replaced the
concept of diversified investment, which prevailed earlier.
Now, it is believed that any investment that you make should be well-
researched and should be based on the valuation of the company. So, if the
stocks are picked with this approach, it is evident that only a few stocks will fit
in the specifications, and hence, the portfolio will be concentrated.
Warren Buffett emphasizes that you must measure every investment wisely, and
invest with an attitude as if it is the only investment you will ever make. And by
following this practice, you would have fewer but well-thought over, well-
researched investment portfolio. But, the question remains the same, which is,
how many stocks should you opt for in the beginning?
Here, is what the famous legends suggest on buying stocks:
The best way to get into investment is to buy stocks within your circle of
competence. You must pick one or two companies that you think are in a
business that you understand well. And, try to delve deeper into knowing more
about those companies and digging into details that we have discussed in earlier
chapters. Keep repeating the same process with other securities. Slowly, you
keep adding to your portfolio to bring up the number of investments.
So, it is good to have a well-thought-over collection of stocks in your portfolio,
but coming to a number will be difficult. Most professional investors stick to
keeping 15 to 20 stocks in their investment kitty, as a thumb rule. Ben Graham
indicates that any number of shares between 10 and 30 is good enough to have a
stable risk-averse portfolio, whereas, Warren Buffett advises restricting your
collection to just 5 to 10 stocks.
But, if you still want to know what should be the ideal number of stocks to hold
in a portfolio, then, there is no consensus on this.
As per my advice, when you start as an investor, you will tend to make
mistakes, so it is time to diversify your portfolio rather than betting on one or
two stocks. Of course, if you are a young individual with no dependents on you,
then you can buy more stocks depending on your disposable income.
There are two kinds of risks that an investor is exposed to over time. One is
called the ‘unsystematic risk’ which is associated with the company or industry
you have invested in. The other is the systematic risk, which indicates the risk
of the entire stock market crash or recession. Having more number of stocks in
a portfolio, guards you against the unsystematic risk to a great extent. And, by
being a serious long-term investor, you anyway guard against the systematic
risk of investment.
Good Stocks Defy All Odds
The stocks of companies with efficient management defy all odds and tend to
perform very well in the long run.
When there was a stock market crash in India between 1992 and 2003, the
Sensex hit an all-time low, but stocks of good companies like Infosys still
moved up a few thousand times. Besides, other stocks of some promising
companies in technology, pharmaceuticals, and FMCG sectors, also moved up
considerably during this crash. Thus, it shows that good stocks end up
delivering good results during the negative years, too, provided you hold on to
them for a longer time.
Stocks or Mutual Funds? Which is a better investment bet?
The biggest myth that has been around for decades is that mutual fund investors
have a safer ride as compared to individual investors. But is this true? Let’s dig
deeper to understand who is at an advantage when it comes to stock investment.
For decades, mutual fund investments have been believed to be a safe bet in
stock investment. Yet, individual investments are considered better than mutual
fund investments.
Can Individual Investors Outperform the Mutual Fund Investors?
Yes, Individual Investors can outperform the Mutual fund investors at times,
due to the following reasons:
1. Risk-taking ability: The fund managers cannot take the risk as they are
accountable for someone else’s money, so they have to play safe. On the other
hand, individual investors can take as much risk as they want because they are
investing their own money.
Example: Suppose, a fund manager invested his client’s money to buy a few
stocks of Infosys Ltd. But, due to market fluctuations, the Infosys’s stock price
drops, leading to a loss. In this case, the fund manager is usually not blamed for
the losses, as Infosys is considered to be one of the safest bets for investment,
and any investor would blindly invest money in big names like Infosys. On the
other hand, if the same fund manager would have invested in a stock like V2
Retail, and suppose its prices dropped, then, his investment skills and
understanding would be questioned, as V2 is an unpopular stock.
So, the mutual fund managers are forced to refrain from taking a risk to protect
their image and to keep their jobs secure.
2. SEBI regulations: A mutual fund company is bound by the SEBI
regulations, unlike an individual investor. As per the SEBI guidelines, a Mutual
fund company has to abide by the following guidelines:
• A fund manager cannot invest more than 10% in one stock, whereas an
individual investor has 100% freedom of investment.
• A large-cap fund cannot invest in a small company, whereas an individual
investor can invest anywhere at any time as per wish.
• A mutual fund has serious liquidity concerns to liquidate the generated
portfolio. On the contrary, an individual investor can liquidate his stocks as
freely as required.
• A mutual fund manager cannot choose when to sell the stocks. He has to sell
the stocks when the redemption pressure crops in, but an individual investor
faces no such challenge. The same has been explained with an example at the
end of this chapter.
• A mutual fund company is not able to invest because of its huge financial
investment corpus and due to the SEBI disclosure requirement, but, an
Individual investor is not bound by any such regulation.
Sounds complicated, right? Let’s understand this with an example. Suppose an
XYZ company has released 1000 shares at Rs. 100 each. The Mutual Fund
company sees potential in XYZ Company and wants to purchase a vast number
of its shares. Also, the MF Company is aware that XYZ will release the next
1000 shares later.
Suppose, the mutual fund company bought all 1000 shares at 100 Rs. So, as per
the SEBI guidelines, any investment of more than 10% needs to be disclosed
publicly. Thus, the next day’s newspaper will reveal that so and so MF
Company has bought 1000 XYZ’s shares. And, as soon as this news is out, the
price of the stocks of the XYZ Company will increase as the demand has
increased.
After this, XYZ releases another 1000 shares at a hiked price of say Rs. 500.
Now the mutual fund company will be reluctant to buy a new set of 1000
stocks, as the prices have increased. So, this is how an MF Company is not able
to buy enough quantity of stocks because of its vast corpus and SEBI disclosure
requirement.
Let me share with you one of the personal experiences depicting how
individual investment outperforms most of the time.
A couple of years back, one of my family friends sought advice from me on
stock investment. I had researched a company that appeared to have a promising
future. So I bought a few shares of it and advised my friend too to buy some.
The shares were priced at Rs. 500 at the time we both bought them.
After a few weeks, the share price dropped to Rs. 400 and my friend started
worrying. But, since I had faith in the company, I bought a few more shares at a
reduced price and advised my friend to buy some more. My friend reluctantly
purchased a few more shares on my advice. After some time, the prices dropped
to Rs. 300, he again sought my opinion on this investment.
I insisted on holding those shares and also advised to buy more, as I did. He
still bought some more shares but very hesitantly. Finally, the prices dropped to
Rs. 200 a few days later. My investor friend lost belief in me and sold off all the
shares at a massive loss of 60%. But, I continued to buy more shares of that
company as I knew the prices would bounce back soon. Now, my average price
per share had become Rs. 210. In three years, the stock price increased to Rs.
700 and I made three times my initial investment value.
So, as an individual investor, I could take the risk with my money and acted as
per my wish, and thus ended up making good money. But as an advisor, my
hands were tied, and the funds had to be liquidated against my will when the
redemption pressure cropped in. As I said earlier as well, patience usually pays
off in the stock market if the fundamentals are strong.
Chapter 26: Bagging the Multi-Bagger
Stocks!
You would have often come across this term ‘multi-bagger stocks’ in
newspapers or on the financial news channels. So, let's understand the real
concept behind this new buzz word ‘multi-bagger stocks.’
Multi-bagger stocks are those stocks that fetch huge returns that are multiple
times their initial investment costs. Such stocks generate not just huge profits
but tremendous wealth to let you live life king-size.
It is due to multi-bagger stocks, that the stock investment expert and the ideal of
many, Warren Buffett, created a multi-billion worth. He was fortunate enough
to have chosen the multi-bagger stocks at the right time.
How to Pick the Multi-bagger Stocks?
1. Identify a company that sells in mass volumes and has premium
margins. The stocks of such companies prove out to be multi-bagger stocks.
Any company can either compromise on selling in volumes or earning great
margins. It is very difficult for a company to excel in both these business
models. Maruti, for instance, is known for selling in volumes. Whereas,
Mercedes is known for earning huge margins.
Here are a few examples of multi-bagger companies that have excelled in
selling in huge numbers in premium prices-
Foreign companies: Starbucks, Apple, etc.
Apple products are the costliest with respect to their competitors, and yet
Apple’s products are able to land in the hands of almost every alternate
household. This is only possible because of its unique design and customer-
friendly interface. People are loyal towards the brand and stickiness is such that
they always (mostly) come back to its products.
Domestic companies: Eicher Motors, Page Industries (Jockey Brand Innerwear),
etc.
Royal Enfield Bullet, manufactured by Eicher Motors is sold in huge volumes
that too at a very high price. WHY?
Well, this bike’s model and engine has never been updated in the last many
years. The beauty of this model is its nostalgia. Without any drastic upgradation
of features, or change in design and style, bullet is the highest selling bike of
Eicher Motors.
The stocks of these companies have multiplied over 100 times in the last 10
years, thus making them multi-bagger stocks.
2. Scan the environment:
Find out, how is the track record of the management of the company? How has
the company been performing in the past? What are the future growth aspects of
the industry? You must try to gather all such necessary details about the
company before investing in it.
3. Is the company benefiting out of the passing trend or is its competitive
advantage sustainable?
Never invest in companies that are temporarily benefitted out of a change of
policy or any other external environmental factor, as you would lose out on your
money soon when the benefits of the passing trend are withdrawn from the
company.
One real-life example of the same is the Graphite industry in India. Back in
November 2018, China introduced a policy ban on steel mills to check the
pollution caused by the rising level of smog. So, China started importing
Graphite from countries like India to suffice its manufacturing needs. As a
result, the graphite industry started seeing an upsurge, resulting in stock price
hike of companies like Graphite India and HEG.
Later in 2019, the competition in the graphite industry rose, and then export to
countries like China and Iran was curbed. So, the profit margins of Graphite
India and HEG dropped drastically. Now, if as an investor you would have
picked up a stock of Graphite India, your money would have been at stake. So,
the lesson learnt here is to check if the company has sustainable profits or it is
just benefitted temporarily due to some favourable circumstances.
The Hunt for 100X Returns
The small-cap and mid-cap funds are looked upon as the funds with high
returns. But, these funds come with their inherent risks as there are many factors
that influence these stocks.
For example, a few years back, small-cap funds were looked upon as the most
promising investments, and they did give excellent returns to the investors. But,
in the past year, the small-cap funds have been suffering from huge losses and
are still declining further in their prices.
Chapter 27: A Bird’s Eye View to Investing
Can you think of some exciting feature which interests a big investor? If you
think hard, you can list down a couple of them. A prominent investor is always
on the lookout for finding the right company to acquire, or to buy a major stake
in a well-performing company.
The most common measure of finding the true worth and size of the company is
market capitalization. Market capitalization refers to the total value of a
company which is found out as follows.
Market Capitalization = Total number of shares × Price of one share
Let’s assume a company ‘X’ has 20,000 shares floating in the market. And, the
price of each share is, say, Rs. 500. So, the market capitalization is
Market Capitalization = 20,000 × 500 = Rs. 1,00,00,000
Bird’s Eye Perspective
An investor needs to be extremely aware of his ways of investing to make
profitable investments. The more is the investment value, the more careful an
investor needs to be as he is putting a much higher value at stake.
So, if say you are planning to buy company ‘X’ costing Rs. 1,00,00,000. Then,
you need to do a proper cost-benefit analysis by first figuring out where else can
you use Rs. 1,00,00,000. This is done to ensure that you evaluate every possible
opportunity around you to make the best possible use of Rs. 1,00,00,000.
Developing this perspective is much needed to place your bets right in the
investment industry. Seasoned investors like Warren Buffett, Thomas Rowe
Price Jr., John Neff, Jesse Livermore, Peter Lynch, and many more, practice this
strategy of finding the best available alternative before investing a considerable
sum.
I strongly recommend this perspective as it helps you to evaluate the true worth
and value of your money. I want to remind you here once again that a wrong
investment in stock irrespective of its value, can cause you immense loss much
bigger than the value invested. So, knowing the power of stock investment
which acts as a money multiplier, it becomes essential to evaluate the available
options or alternatives before investing a huge amount of money in a company.
Chapter 28: An Essential Checklist for
Stock Investments
The concepts shared in this book form a complete beginner’s guide to investing
in stocks. This chapter contains an overview of the book to give you a checklist
to narrow down your choices.
The checklist shared here resonates with the best-proven principles of
investment followed by Charlie Munger. Charlie Munger is indeed the best
investment advisor in the world, and has shared the following principles in his
book called ‘Investing Principles Checklist.’
These principles will provide the decisiveness needed to make safe investments.
So, here is a checklist to help you make a systematic investment which is more
factual and realistic.
1. Understand the line of business
• Have you understood the company’s business and the industry?
• Do you understand how this business makes money?
• How is the track record of the business so far?
• Have you checked if the industry does not have a high degree of obsolescence?
2. How is the economy of the industry that you are willing to plunge in?
• Do you think that the market for this business will grow substantially for another
decade or so?
• Do you believe that the company will maintain a good ROE for the next 10
years or so?
• What is that one economic moat of the company that segregates it from the rest
of the competitors?
• Can the business dictate price terms without losing out on customers?
• Are the exit barriers very low in cost that will allow a company to exit anytime it
wants to?
• Is the business strong enough to dictate terms to its suppliers?
• How intense is the competition in this business?
3. Understand the financial health of the company
• How is the current financial health of the company?
• Has the past decade witnessed consistent growth in sales and profit of the
company?
• Does the company have a low debt/equity ratio, unless it’s a financial institution
or a bank?
• Does the company haves FCCB (Foreign Currency Convertible Bonds)? It is not
mandatory for each company to have FCCB bonds, but having them brings
credibility to the company.
• What is the current worth /total asset value of the company?
• Is the company able to earn a good amount of Free Cash Flow? (The company
might earn good profits every year as credit, which might get realized or
might land up becoming a bad debt. Hence, free cash flow assures that the
company has confirmed the availability of funds currently.)
4. Take Measured Risks
You must always think before you leap when it comes to making financial
investments. Hence to take calculated risks, you must check the following:
• Keep a reasonable margin of safety
• Check the track record of the people/companies/advisors you are dealing with.
• Avoid making hasty decisions.
• Don’t be too aggressive, sit back, and think patiently.
• Keep a check on the changing market parameters such as inflation, government
regulations, interest rate changes, etc.
5. Have an independent approach
• Never fall victim to herd mentality syndrome. Always use fundamental analysis
and judgement for making investments. Slowly, you will learn how to gauge
the stocks and when to invest in them! This is a learning experience that will
benefit you for a lifetime.
6. Be a learner
• It is far more critical to approach investments in the right manner than to make
the right investments.
• You need to learn, read, be curious, and be observant to learn the art of
investment.
• Investing is a journey on the go; you need to become wiser with each passing
day.
• You must have the habit of asking ‘why’ about everything that you see around to
become a smart investor someday!
7. Be humble and realistic
• You need to be modest and realistic in accepting what you don’t know.
• Do not just make up your concepts and beliefs without having any solid
underlying basis to the same.
• You must take care to operate only within your circle of competence, no matter
how small it is.
• Remember, any false news, beliefs, analysis, conclusions, will instantly fool you
as an investor.
8. Be Analytical
• Look at the value of investment rather than just looking at its price.
• Look at the larger picture of a company that takes you beyond its worth, its
current activity and positioning. Try to see how it is trying to impact the lives
of people.
• Always try to think forward and backward to analyze a business. You must aim
at becoming a business analyst rather than a security analyst.
9. Allocate the capital wisely
• The most critical thing for an investor is to allocate his capital wisely.
• Always remember that the term ‘best investment’ is relative and not absolute. So
the ‘best’ is still defined by the second-best. Thus the parameters defining the
best investment keep changing at all times.
• Excellent investment options are scarce to find. When you see a lot of odds
stuck to stock, then, it might be a great investment opportunity for you.
• Never get attached to any stock that favoured you in the past. Always be
opportunistic and understand the market well.
10. Be Patient
• Never trade unnecessarily, else you will only get to read about the immense
power of compound interest and will never reap its benefits in reality.
• Learn to enjoy the process as it takes you to your destination. Enjoying the
process hones your skills of investment.
• Never bear unnecessary transactional costs by being a mere trader.
• Always think, think, and think before acting.
11. Take the right decisions
• Under any circumstances, you must be capable of analyzing the factors correctly
to arrive at the correct conclusions.
• The conclusions are highly time-dependent, and you need to have the conviction
to choose wisely between the options.
• As per the general convention, you must do the opposite of what you see others
doing. Be fearful of making investments when others are confident and vice-
versa.
• A good investment policy would be to keep your mind prepared at all times, to
hear the good and the bad news, as the stock market is a highly fluctuating
place, and, you need to keep your emotions away while investing in stocks.
12. Be ready to change
• Change is the only constant factor in life, and they say one must change as the
world changes. Likewise, the rules of the game change with time, so, you
must embrace the new standards with grace and happiness. And you need to
adapt to the changes in the world, as the world will never change as per you.
• Deal with the bitter truths! It is a myth that truth is always painful; instead, the
truth is far better than lies.
13. Stay Focussed
• You must be simple in investment approach and have simplistic expectations.
• Never get distracted by the trends to gamble or trade around.
• Be a serious investor and look at each business from the owner’s perspective.
• It is always okay to make mistakes, but you need to avoid repeating the same
mistakes.
• While analysing a stock, take care of even the smallest unfavourable factor, as
even a tiny hole in the ship can sink it.
14. Stock Pricing
• Is the stock of the company overpriced or under-priced as compared to its
intrinsic value?
• Is the company expected to grow at a fast rate?
• Have you checked the P/E ratio? The P/E ratio tells how much money you are
paying for every rupee of earnings. The P/E ratio gives you an idea if the
company is overvalued or undervalued.
14. Check your attitude towards investment
• You must invest with the right approach in this stock and not because the stock
is bought by somebody you look up to or have faith in.
• Are you able to honestly evaluate the stock without the fear of incurring a loss,
when you have held it for too long?
• Are you trying to compete with others by picking up more stocks?
• Please see that you are not a victim of any psychological biases of investment
such as availability bias, gambler's fallacy, recency bias, confirmation bias,
familiarity bias, representative bias, hindsight bias, consistency bias,
commitment bias, disposition effect bias, etc.
• For checking the preferences, answer the following questions:
a. Is the stock held by a person I admire and which is why I want to invest?
(Representative/authority bias)
b. Am I driven by the recently published data, or have I looked at evidence of past
one or two decades? (Recency bias)
c. Am I relying on the readily available information about the company or have I
dug deeper into unavailable details too? (Availability bias)
d. Have I checked any other well-doing company which failed despite looking
equally promising? Have I tried to find why it failed? (Confirmation bias)
e. Do I respond to negative news actively? (Consistency bias)
f. Am I willing to readily invite change in my investment portfolio? (Attachment
bias)
Too often you would have seen doctors following a checklist for surgery, or pre-
takeoff checklists followed by aircraft staff for passengers’ safety. Do you know
that the strict norms of following a checklist have minimized surgical errors to a
great extent? Moreover, the pilots can give you an error-free smooth ride only
because they follow a strict checklist before flying.
Such checklists are used everywhere to smoothen the operations processes. For
example, checklists are used before software releases, for sports, for academic
research, for professional driving lessons and almost everywhere.
Though stock market investment is not as critical as surgeries or flying an aircraft,
yet, having a checklist can help you stay focussed, and organized, and can help to
minimize errors to a great extent.
In the words of Benjamin Franklin – ‘An investment in knowledge pays the best
interest, so always be a learner on the go.’
Conclusion
Stock Market is Like a Life-Partner,
You Love it or You hate it,
You Surely Need it!
A prologue to the creation of your successful investment Journey
The reading ends, the action begins….
I am sure that now you would get into stock investment with a confident self-
initiated approach rather than relying blindly on the stockbrokers or professional
investment agencies.
This book indicates a paradigm shift in investment practices from traditional
long-standing trading to modern value investing principles. The two essential
takeaways from this book are, ‘Slow and Steady Wins the Race!’ and ‘You need
to play this game with the right intent to win the game.’ I hope this book acts as
an eye-opener to solve the long-standing mystery of stock investment.
Though, just by reading this book, you wouldn’t become an expert in stock
investment right from the first day. But, this book would surely act as a guide to
help you chart your investment course, which will help you make good wealth.
A significant chunk of the young population is actively investing in the stock
market. The only intent in writing this book is to encourage every individual to
invest in stocks in a well-informed manner, as it has the potential to generate an
alternate source of income to sustain a good standard of living.
Thank you for sparing some of your precious time for ‘Investonomy’. If you
enjoyed reading this book, then do share it with your friends, family, and
acquaintances to help them benefit too. Please feel free to share your feedback,
ideas, and suggestions with me at support@finology.in
Happy Investing (cid:0)
The Academy Of Value Investing
You would understand that there are limitations to a book. Penning down details
covering every aspect of Value Investing in this book is not possible. Therefore,
if your curiosity about value investing has not been satiated then, here’s our
exclusive course on the same. It’s called the Academy of Value Investing.
The Academy of Value Investing is a unique BSE Ccourse that offers a lifetime
experience which aims to help subscribers develop novel and rational
investment decisions. In this journey, you will find-
• Chapters for understanding all the basic finance terminologies specially designed for beginners
• Chapters for understanding and analyzing the
annual report of a company
• Modules for learning to value a stock
• Lessons from the experiences of experts
• Chapters on “how to choose a company” as
well as “how not to choose a company”.
• Examples busting myths prevailing in the stock
market
• Sector wise analysis of the stock market
• All this and much more
Scan the QR Code to get there directly!
Here’s a Pleasant Surprise for You!
TICKER
As I’ve mentioned through the course of this book time and again, speculating
is a disastrous strategy in the stock market. So, equity research should be an
integral part of your journey to create wealth with stock market investing. I
understand that it could be overwhelming at times and also, it takes substantial
time and effort. But, how about if I tell you that you could get it done through a
virtual assistant? Yes, that’s true!
‘Ticker’ is the revolutionary equity research tool and stock screener that I’m
referring to. There are other equity research tools out there which miss out on
some features or the other. Ticker has been developed to address this issue. Be it
stock baskets prepared using proven strategies, a robust platform for stock
analysis, or detailed peer comparison, Ticker has got you covered.
Experienced investors and newbie investors face different kinds of issues while
investing. In fact, their ways of researching are also different along with their
research requirements. Ticker is a wholesome tool that helps all kinds of
investors make the right decision, more importantly a well-informed decision.